The first case of someone suffering from Covid-19 can be traced back to 17 November, according to media reports on unpublished Chinese government data. The report, in the South China Morning Post, said Chinese authorities had identified at least 266 people who contracted the virus last year and who came under medical surveillance, and the earliest case was 17 November – weeks before authorities announced the emergence of the new virus. The Chinese government was widely criticised over attempts to cover up the outbreak in the early weeks, including crackdowns on doctors who tried to warn colleagues about a new Sars-like virus which was emerging in the city of Wuhan in Hubei province. The data obtained by the Post, which the Guardian has not been able to verify, said a 55-year-old from Hubei province could have been the first person to contract Covid-19. For about one month after that date there were one to five new cases reported each day, the report said, and by 20 December there were 60 confirmed cases. The virus, which is now a pandemic, has infected at least 128,343 people across the world and killed 4,702. Of those who have contracted the virus since it began, 68,324 people have recovered. Almost 81,000 of the cases occurred in China, mostly in the province of Hubei. Official statements by the Chinese government to the World Health Organisation reported that the first confirmed case had been diagnosed on 8 December. Doctors who tried to raise the alarm with colleagues about a new disease in late December were reprimanded. Authorities did not publicly concede there was human-to-human transmission until 21 January. Jonathan Mayer, professor emeritus at the University of Washington’s department of epidemiology, said it was “entirely conceivable” there were cases as early as mid-November. He said there were three possibilities: that cases weren’t detected at the time, that they were detected but not recognised as a new disease, or they were detected and recognised but reporting was suppressed. “I have no way of knowing which of these possibilities in fact happened,” Mayer told the Guardian.  “We know that there are reports of early suppression of reports of cases, and the ‘whistleblowers’ dealt with rather severely. But in fairness, the signs and symptoms of Covid-19 are non-specific and even now, without confirmatory testing, it is easy to mistake this for another disease.” Mayer said it was highly improbably that patient zero would ever be identified. The origins of the virus have become part of US-China diplomatic conflict, fuelled by US officials calling the disease “Chinese coronavirus” or “Wuhan virus”. It’s widely accepted, including by the head of China’s Center for Disease Control and Prevention that the virus originated in Hubei. However in recent weeks Chinese officials have started suggesting or outright claiming that the virus did not originate in China, but perhaps in the US, a conspiracy theory that is gaining traction. On Thursday, Zhao Lijian, a foreign ministry spokesman, suggested without evidence that the US army may have brought it into China. “Epidemics always have become political,” said Mayer. “Governments seem opposed to admitting that things were handled imperfectly, yet it is only by identifying the imperfections and shortcomings that things can be addressed to do a better job next time. With emerging infections, there will always be a next time.”
A mysterious respiratory illness that has infected dozens of people in a central Chinese city is not Sars, local authorities have said. The 2002-03 epidemic of severe acute respiratory syndrome started in southern China and killed more than 700 people. Fears of a recurrence arose this month after a number of people were taken to hospital with unexplained viral pneumonia in Wuhan, the capital of Hubei province. Fifty-nine people had been diagnosed with the condition as of Sunday. They have been isolated while they receive treatment, according to the Wuhan municipal health commission. Seven are in a critical condition. The commission said in a statement that initial investigations had ruled out Sars as well as Middle East respiratory syndrome, influenza, bird flu and adenovirus. The commission said previously that the condition’s most common symptom was fever, with shortness of breath and lung infections appearing in a small number of cases. There were no clear indications of human-to-human transmission. Several patients were working at the South China Seafood City food market in Wuhan’s suburbs. The commission said the market would be suspended and investigated. Hong Kong’s hospital authority said on Sunday that 15 patients were being treated for symptoms including fever and respiratory infection after recent visits to Wuhan. Hospitals and doctors had been directed to report cases of fever in anyone who had travelled to Wuhan in the past 14 days, Hong Kong’s health chief, Sophia Chan, said. The hospital authority said it has activated a serious response level to curb the spread of the infection. Chan warned Hong Kong residents against visiting wet markets and eating wild game in mainland China. The World Health Organization said it was monitoring the situation closely and maintaining contact with Chinese authorities. No travel or trade restrictions were necessary at this time, it said.
China has been battling what may be a new strain of pneumonia after 59 people contracted a mysterious respiratory illness in central China, prompting fears of another Sars outbreak. Health officials are worried about the upcoming Spring Festival in late January, when China celebrates lunar new year and millions of people will be travelling across the country to go home. Authorities have warned citizens to be on the lookout for symptoms like fever, difficulty breathing or body ache. On Tuesday, Hong Kong’s chief executive, Carrie Lam, said health officials had “strengthened measures on all borders”. Since Monday, all travellers arriving on trains from Wuhan have been subjected to body temperature checks. Health authorities in Wuhan first reported 27 cases of an unidentified pneumonia-like illness at the end of December, a figure that jumped to 59 as of Sunday. The patients, seven of whom are in critical condition, have been quarantined. There have been no reported deaths. Authorities said epidemiologists have ruled out the possibility of Sars, the deadly respiratory virus that spread to at least 37 countries and killed more than 800 people in 2002 and 2003, an outbreak made worse by a government cover-up. Wuhan officials said there was no “clear” evidence of human-to-human transmission. Investigators also ruled out Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (Mers) and bird flu. Symptoms of the mysterious virus include fevers, problems breathing and invasive lesions to both lungs, shown in radiographs. Some of the patients worked at a seafood market in the city, according to the health commission, suggesting the possibility of animal-to-human transmission. Several shops at the market also sold wild animals including birds, snakes, deer, groundhogs, according to Chinese media reports. The market has been shuttered since New Year’s Day. Shopkeepers nearby said they were concerned about the apparent outbreak but continued normal operations. “Of course we are worried but we don’t wear face masks. It isn’t good for business and also nothing has been confirmed yet,” said a woman surnamed Huang, who sells eyeglasses near the seafood market. The World Health Organization (WHO) said on Sunday it was closely monitoring the situation and was in “close contact” with Chinese authorities. “There is limited information to determine the overall risk of this reported cluster of pneumonia of unknown etiology,” the organisation said. Wuhan, the capital of Hubei province, is a major urban centre with a population of more than 10 million. Local authorities have identified 120 close contacts that are now under medical observation, according to the WHO. Wuhan authorities said they were also carrying out extra sanitation and hygiene measures, and investigating the cause of the virus. Elsewhere in the region citizens braced for the worst. In Hong Kong, which was hit badly by the Sars outbreak, shoppers stockpiled face masks. Hospitals have reported 21 patients with fevers and other respiratory symptoms who recently visited Wuhan. Seven have been discharged and the other cases have so far not proven to be related to the cluster in Wuhan. In Singapore, where travellers coming from the city are now required to go through temperature screening, a three-year-old Chinese girl who had travelled to Wuhan was quarantined. On Sunday, officials said she had a common childhood respiratory infection. Authorities also appear to worried about panic spreading, with censors on Weibo blocking the hashtag #WuhanSARS. While Chinese media have been reporting on the outbreak, citizens who remember the Sars cover-up still mistrust the information released by their government. Online internet users questioned authorities assurance that there were no examples of “clear human-to-human transmission” of the infection. One user wrote: “Do we have to wait until it is ‘obvious’ before we fix the situation?”
More cases of coronavirus have been confirmed in the Chinese city of Wuhan and a second person has died, according to local authorities. It comes as disease-modelling experts warned that far more people may have been affected by the previously unknown virus than thought. The Wuhan municipal health commission said in a statement that four patients diagnosed with pneumonia on Thursday were in a stable condition, taking the total number of cases to nearly 50. The statement released in the early hours on Saturday is the first confirmation of new cases by the commission in nearly a week. On Friday, the commission announced the second death from the virus. A 69-year-old man was admitted to hospital with abnormal renal function and severe damage to multiple organs, and died on 15 January, the commission said. Preliminary lab tests cited by state media showed the pathogen could be from a new type of coronavirus, a large family of viruses that can cause infections ranging from the common cold to deadly severe acute respiratory syndrome (Sars). World Health Organization disease-modelling experts based at Imperial College, London, said that far more people may have been infected and they warned human-to-human transmission could not be ruled out. Prof Neil Ferguson and colleagues, from the MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis at Imperial, calculated that the number of cases in Wuhan may be more than 1,700. “It is likely that the Wuhan outbreak of a novel coronavirus has caused substantially more cases of moderate or severe respiratory illness than currently reported,” they said in a report. The report said all hospitalised cases of pneumonia or severe respiratory disease in the Wuhan area and other well-connected Chinese cities should be investigated. They cautioned that because of the unknown factors in their estimates, the case numbers could be anywhere from 190 to over 4,000. But in a tweet, they said that “the magnitude of these numbers suggests that substantial human-to-human transmission cannot be ruled out. Heightened surveillance, prompt information sharing and enhanced preparedness are recommended.” Their calculation is based on the two people in Thailand and one in Japan who were diagnosed with the virus. Based on flight and population data, said Ferguson, “there is only a 1 in 574 chance that a person infected in Wuhan would travel overseas before they sought medical care. This implies there might have been over 1,700 (3 x 574) cases in Wuhan so far.” US authorities announced they would begin screening passengers arriving from Wuhan on direct or connecting flights at three airports: San Francisco, New York’s JFK and Los Angeles. Authorities in Hong Kong, Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore and South Korea, Indonesia and the Philippines have all stepped up screening. In Australia, the New South Wales and Victorian governments both issued alerts to health professionals about the virus, but there was no specific screening for the virus or change to travel advice. Japan and Thailand both reported new cases of the mystery strain of coronavirus virus this week and experts say it might spread further as a result of the Chinese lunar new year holiday starting next week, which sees millions of people travel across the country. On Thursday Japan confirmed a man in his 30s had been infected with the virus, and a Chinese woman was quarantined in Thailand. The World Health Organization (WHO) has warned a wider outbreak is possible. On Friday, Thailand confirmed a second case. A 74-year-old Chinese woman from Wuhan had been quarantined since her arrival on Monday and was found to be infected with the newly identified coronavirus, said Sukhum Karnchanapimai, permanent secretary of the Public Health Ministry. Sukhum also urged Thais to remain calm, saying that there was no outbreak in the country. The Wuhan health commission said late on Thursday that 12 people had recovered and been discharged from hospital but five others were in serious condition. It also said no human-to-human transmission had been confirmed but the possibility “cannot be excluded”. Another WHO doctor said it would not be surprising if there was “some limited human-to-human transmission, especially among families who have close contact with one another”. “It is not surprising that we are starting to hear of more cases in other countries and a range of severity from asymptomatic, to mild and severe illness,” said infectious disease expert and director of Wellcome Dr Jeremy Farrar. “It is possible that the often mild symptoms from this coronavirus may be masking the true numbers of people who have been infected, or the extent of person-to-person transmission. It is probable that we are looking at patients being affected over a number of days from multiple animal sources and with some degree of human-to-human transmission.” The first confirmed fatality from the virus was a 61-year-old man in Wuhan who died of pneumonia after testing positive. Memories remain fresh in Asia of a 2002-03 outbreak of Sars, which emerged in China and killed nearly 800 people around the world.
Chinese authorities are to step up efforts to contain the outbreak of a new virus before the lunar new year holidays amid fears of the bug spreading to other countries. Health officials in Wuhan, the city at the heart of the outbreak, confirmed 17 new cases of the Sars-like coronavirus on Sunday, including three patients who are said to be in a severe condition. The new strain has caused alarm because of its connection to severe acute respiratory syndrome, which killed more than 750 people globally in 2002-03. Adding to those concerns is the imminent movement of hundreds of millions of Chinese who will be travelling to visit family during the holidays that start next week, increasing the potential for the virus to spread further afield. “Our commission will step up our guard during the spring festival, pay close attention to the development and change of the epidemic, and direct the implementation of prevention and control measures,” China’s national health commission said on Sunday, adding that it believed the outbreak could be controlled. Of the 17 new cases confirmed in Wuhan, three were described as severe and two patients were too critical to be moved, authorities said. Two people have died from the virus in Wuhan, the largest city in central China. Three cases have been confirmed abroad – two in Thailand and one in Japan, involving people either from Wuhan or who had recently visited the city. The virus has infected 62 people in Wuhan, with eight in a severe condition, 19 cured and discharged from hospital, and the rest remaining in isolation where they are receiving treatment. Those infected have ranged from 30 to 79 years old. Authorities said they had begun “optimised” testing of pneumonia cases across the city to identify others infected, and would begin “detection work … towards suspected cases in the city” as a next step, as well as carrying out “sampling tests”. The World Health Organization said on Sunday that some of the new cases did not appear to be linked to the Huanan seafood market, the suspected source of the outbreak. “The fact that three cases have been exported to Thailand and Japan without connection to the Huanan seafood market suggests that the virus has spread beyond the Huanan seafood market into the community,” David Hui, a professor of respiratory medicine at the Chinese University of Hong Kong, told Reuters. Wuhan’s deputy mayor, Chen Yanxin, said oversight would be strengthened at big events and the number of public gatherings would be reduced, state media reported. Since 14 January, city officials have used infrared thermometers at airports, railways and other routes into the city to screen passengers, but their task is being hampered by this being the peak of the influenza season. Chen said passengers with fevers were being registered, given masks and taken to medical institutions, with nearly 300,000 body temperature tests carried out, according to CCTV. Scientists with the MRC Centre for Global Infectious Disease Analysis at Imperial College in London said in a paper published on Friday that the number of cases in the city was likely to be closer to 1,700 – much higher than the number officially identified. No human-to-human transmission has been confirmed so far, but Wuhan’s health commission has previously said the possibility “cannot be excluded”. Authorities in Hong Kong have stepped up detection measures, including rigorous temperature checkpoints for inbound travellers from the Chinese mainland. The US said from Friday it would begin screening direct flights arriving from Wuhan at San Francisco airport and New York’s JFK as well as Los Angeles, where many flights connect. Thailand said it was already screening passengers arriving in Bangkok, Chiang Mai and Phuket and would soon introduce similar controls in the beach resort of Krabi. Wuhan is a major transport hub, including during the lunar new year holiday when Chinese people make an estimated 3bn trips around the country to visit family.  