Chinese authorities have suspended all outbound public transport from Wuhan, the city at the centre of an outbreak of the mysterious Sars-like coronavirus, which has so far killed 17 people. Bus, subway, ferry and long-distance passenger transportation networks from the city were suspended from 10am local time on Thursday, state media reported. The city’s airport and train stations were also closed to outgoing passengers. The government asked citizens not to leave the city of 11 million unless there were special circumstances, state media said. The latest death toll, announced by the provincial government of the central province of Hubei, where the virus is believed to have originated, almost doubles the previously estimated total. More than 540 people who have contracted the virus have been taken to hospital with breathing difficulties. Many more are thought to have developed a milder form of the illness, which is mainly passed through the respiratory tract. On Thursday, authorities said 571 people had been infected. The first case of the virus was also confirmed in Hong Kong. China is in the midst of a public health crisis as a new strain of coronavirus, from the family of viruses that gave rise to Sars, has swept the country. Officials said the nation was now at the most critical stage of prevention and control, especially as China prepares to celebrate the lunar new year on 25 January and hundreds of millions will crisscross the country. “Spring festival is just around the corner … which objectively increases the risk of the disease spreading and the difficulty of prevention and control. We must not be careless, and we must be highly vigilant,” said Li Bin, deputy director of the commission. “The virus may mutate, and there is a risk of further spread of the virus,” he said. The public have been advised to avoid densely populated areas. The World Health Organization put off a decision over whether to declare the outbreak a global health emergency and asked its expert committee on the issue to continue their meeting for a second day on Thursday. The Who’s director general said that the emergency measures taken by authorities in Wuhan showed commitment to minimising risks locally and abroad. “What they are doing is a very, very strong measure and with full commitment,” said Dr Tedros Ahanom Ghebreyesus. “We stressed to them that by having a strong action not only they will control the outbreak in their country but they will also minimise the chances of this outbreak spreading internationally.” In the last week, the number of confirmed infections has more than tripled and cases have been found in 13 provinces, as well as the municipalities of Beijing, Shanghai, Chongqing and Tianjin. The deaths have all taken place in Hubei province. The commission said more than 2,000 close contacts have been identified and more than 1,000 were under current medical watch. Li said the increase in cases was the result of deeper understanding of the disease and improvements in screening for it. Wuhan, the central Chinese city in Hubei province where the outbreak is believed to have originated in a market, has been put under tighter supervision, Li said, with the sale of live poultry banned. Wild animals and poultry are no longer allowed in the city, he said. The local government has cancelled public activities during the holiday, including the annual prayer-giving at the city’s Guiyan Temple, which attracted 700,000 tourists last year. Wuhan’s mayor, Zhou Xianwang, urged residents to not leave the city and visitors to avoid it so that the possibility of transmission can be reduced. “If it’s not necessary we suggest that people don’t come to Wuhan,” Zhou told state broadcaster CCTV. Fever scanners have been set up at the city’s train station and airport and officials check the temperatures of drivers at highway checkpoints, while outbound tour groups have been banned from leaving the city. Taiwan’s China Airlines and Singapore’s Scoot cancelled flights into Wuhan on Thursday. The commission noted the virus is being treated as a class A disease, which means authorities can quarantine patients and put affected areas on lockdown. Li said the government had implemented measures to prevent further spread, including adding temperature checks, minimising large crowds, more screening of potentially infected patients and more protections for health workers. The virus has also been confirmed outside of China, in the US, Thailand, South Korea, Taiwan and Japan. On Wednesday, Thailand confirmed four new cases of the virus while Macau reported its first cases, and officials have introduced health screenings at all airports that have daily flights from Wuhan, including Suvarnabhumi, Don Mueng, Chiang Mai and Phuket. As many as 1,400 tourists from Wuhan visit Thailand every day, according to local media, with many more expected to travel to celebrate the lunar new year. Hong Kong, which was hit particularly hard by Sars, confirmed its first case on Wednesday, according to local media. Taiwan’s president, Tsai Ing-wen, has appealed to citizens not to visit central China. “I want to call on our nationals please not to visit this region if not necessary,” Tsai Ing-wen wrote on her Facebook page late on Tuesday, referring to Wuhan. North Korea has also banned foreign tourists to guard against the spread of a new virus from China, one tour operator said. The temporary closing of the North Korean border would begin on Wednesday, according to Young Pioneer Tours. Meanwhile, Hong Kong airline Cathay Pacific said that it will allow cabin crew to wear surgical masks on mainland flights, after a flight attendant union said it had been flooded with messages of concern from members. Investor nerves over the spread of a deadly new virus from China rattled Asian equities and oil benchmarks on Thursday. Hong Kong and Shanghai both dropped 0.9% in morning trade while Tokyo was 0.6% lower. Sydney and Seoul both fell 0.6% but Taipei was up 0.2%.
Chinese authorities have imposed lockdown measures on ten cities in an unprecedented effort to contain the outbreak of the deadly new virus that has made hundreds of people ill and spread to other parts of the world during the busy lunar new year travel period. Authorities banned transport links from Wuhan, the capital of Hubei province, on Thursday morning, suspending buses, subways, ferries, and shutting the airport and train stations to outgoing passengers. Later in the day, the nearby central Chinese cities of Huanggang and Ezhou announced similar measures. Travel restrictions were also placed on the smaller cities of Chibi and Zhijiang. Starting at midnight, long-distance buses, the rapid transit system, and the train station in Huanggang would be shut, according to a notice from the local government. Cinemas, internet cafes and other entertainment venues would all stop operating. Residents should not leave the city, except for “special reasons”. A government notice in Ezhou said the city’s railway would stop operating on Thursday evening. In nearby Chibi, authorities said buses and rural transport links would be halted. Officials also ordered tour operators to cancel operations and said no more large-scale cultural events were to be held. On Friday, Huangshi in Hubei province also halted public transport. The People’s Daily newspaper said Xiantao, Enshi, Qianjiang and Xianning were also subject to travel restrictions. There have been 830 confirmed cases in China of the coronavirus, from the same family of viruses that gave rise to Sars. Chinese authorities say 95 patients remain in a critical condition. On Thursday, Hebei’s provincial health authority said an infected patient had died, marking the first confirmed death outside Hubei province, where the outbreak began. On Friday morning the official death toll rose to 25. Cases have also been confirmed in the US, the UK, Taiwan, South Korea, Thailand, Japan, Hong Kong, Vietnam and Singapore. Officials worry the weeklong lunar new year holiday, which begins on Saturday and usually sees hundreds of millions of Chinese crisscross the country, will exacerbate an outbreak that has reached almost all of China’s provinces. The state-run Beijing News said the capital had cancelled events including two well-known lunar new year temple fairs. The Forbidden City, the palace complex in Beijing that is now a museum, announced it will close indefinitely on Saturday. The country’s railway operator, China State Railway Group, said passengers would be able to receive full refunds on tickets nationwide starting on Friday. While sweeping measures are typical of China’s communist government, large-scale quarantines are rare around the world, even in deadly epidemics, because of concerns about infringing on people’s liberties, and the effectiveness of such measures is unclear. “To my knowledge, trying to contain a city of 11 million people is new to science,” Gauden Galea, the World Health Organization’s representative in China, told the Associated Press. “It has not been tried before as a public health measure. We cannot at this stage say it will or it will not work.” Late on Thursday Wuhan city authorities said that limits on car travel would be introduced for the first time at noon on Friday. In Wuhan, supermarket shelves were empty and local markets sold out of produce as residents hoarded supplies and isolated themselves at home. Petrol stations were overwhelmed as drivers stocked up on fuel, exacerbated by rumours that reserves had run out. Local residents said pharmacies had sold out of face masks. “When I saw the news when I woke up, I felt like I was going to go crazy. This is a little too late now. The government’s measures are not enough,” said Xiao, 26, a primary schoolteacher in Wuhan, who asked not to give her full name. Anxiety in Wuhan has been exacerbated by reports that hospitals are turning patients away because they do not have enough room. A hospital contacted by the Guardian on Thursday said it had between 500 and 600 patients and recommended patients go to a community health centre instead. Eight hospitals in Wuhan put out calls for donations of protective equipment, according to Chinese media. Officials said they would build a new hospital in six days to accommodate patients, modelled after an isolation facility constructed in Beijing during the Sars outbreak. Hubei officials said schools, on break for the spring festival holiday, would delay the beginning of the spring term. The illnesses from the newly identified coronavirus appeared last month in Wuhan, an industrial and transportation hub in central China. The vast majority of cases in the mainland have been in the city. Analysts have predicted the reported cases will continue to multiply. “Even if [the number of cases] are in the thousands, this would not surprise us,” Galea said. The number of cases was not an indicator of the outbreak’s severity, so long as the mortality rate remained low, he added. The coronavirus family includes the common cold as well as viruses that cause more serious illnesses, such as the Sars outbreak that spread from China to more than a dozen countries in 2002-03 and killed about 800 people, and Middle Eastern respiratory syndrome which developed from camels. China is keen to avoid repeating mistakes with its handling of Sars. For months, even after the illness had spread around the world, China parked patients in hotels and drove them around in ambulances to conceal the true number of cases and avoid WHO experts. In the current outbreak, China has been credited with sharing information rapidly, and President Xi Jinping has emphasised that as a priority. On Thursday a WHO committee said the outbreak does not yet constitute a public health emergency of international concern. Previous emergencies have included Ebola and Zika.
What do the new restrictions involve? In brief: an Italian-style lockdown to force people to stay at home beyond a small range of very limited circumstances. Under the terms explained by Boris Johnson in his TV address, people will be allowed to leave home only for the following reasons: shopping for necessities, as infrequently as possible; one form of exercise a day, such as running or cycling, alone or with household members; for medical or care needs, for example to help a vulnerable person; travelling to and from work, but only if you cannot work from home. Meeting friends, shopping for anything beyond essentials, and gathering in crowds are now banned. What enforcement action will there be? Police will be able to enforce the rules, and impose fines on people who do not abide by them. Authorities will force the closure of all shops selling non-essential goods, including hair and nail salons, and all markets apart from food markets. Also closed will be libraries, outdoor gyms and playgrounds, and churches or other places of worship. Hotels, B&Bs, campsites and caravan parks will also be closed, apart from to permanent residents or key workers. All public gatherings of more than two people will be banned, except if those people share a household. Also prohibited are all social events such as weddings and baptisms, although funerals will be permitted to take place. How long will it last? At least three weeks. Johnson said that after that point, the government will relax the rules “if the evidence shows we are able to” – but this is by no means certain. What is this meant to do? The hope is to severely limit the scale of physical and social interaction, and thus slow the spread of the coronavirus so that the growth in cases does not overwhelm the NHS and lead to mass deaths. As Johnson put it: “Without a huge national effort to halt the growth of this virus, there will come a moment when no health service in the world could possibly cope.” Will it work? This remains to be seen – and given the time lag between infections and people becoming critically ill, it will be up to two weeks before any benefits are realised. On Monday, Italy recorded a slight reduction in the number of coronavirus deaths, two weeks after it introduced a national lockdown. So the UK can expect an exponential growth in infections and deaths first, before – hopefully – the curve flattens. What has been the situation up till now? There has been a gradual increase in restrictions, going from ministers urging people to work from home if possible and avoid pubs and other crowded places, to schools and nurseries being closed, and then on Friday the forced closure of pubs, clubs, restaurants, gyms and other communal businesses. However, the information on physical distancing has thus far been framed as advice, with Johnson stressing the desire of people to be out of doors. What was the background to the move? Opposition parties and, increasingly, some Conservative MPs have been pushing for tougher restrictions on people’s movement, especially following much-shared photos over the weekend of crowds in national parks and elsewhere. Speaking in the Commons on Monday, the former health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, said: “We must move to lockdown rules now that ban non-essential travel. It’s time not just to ask people to do social distancing, but enforce social distancing rules.” What’s happened in other countries? Many other European countries have taken a lockdown approach, generally a week or so before the UK. Italy saw a ban on almost all movement in the north of the country which was extended, and then intensified, with only a selection of vital shops and businesses allowed to open, and police checking on people’s movements. Spain and France have taken similar measures. The most extreme approach was taken in China, where authorities essentially sealed off 11 million people in Wuhan, where the virus first began spreading, before extending the quarantine zone to take in more than 50 million people. People were kept in apartment blocks, with visitors and almost all outside movements banned. Other measures included compulsory temperature tests, and the placing of those feared to be ill in isolation.
The UK’s biological security strategy, published in 2018 to address the threat of pandemics, was not properly implemented, according to a former government chief scientific adviser. Prof Sir Ian Boyd, who advised the environment department for seven years until last August and was involved in writing the strategy, said a lack of resources was to blame. Other experts said there was a gap between pandemic planning and action, and that the strategy had stalled. The UK has been rated as one of the most prepared nations in the world, and some experts have said the coronavirus outbreak would have overwhelmed any government. However, a 2019 parliamentary inquiry into biological security was postponed and then cancelled because MPs were focused on Brexit and then the December general election. Boyd said the government was aware of many risks with low likelihoods but potentially very high impacts on the nation, such as pandemics, severe storms and power blackouts. But he said these were assessed independently from one another, underplaying the total risk, which itself was rising due to climate change, population growth and the globalisation of travel. Looked at alone, a pandemic had appeared unlikely, he said. “As a result, getting sufficient resource just to write a decent biosecurity strategy was tough. Getting resource to properly underpin implementation of what it said was impossible.” Boyd added: “The middle of a crisis may not be the best time to suggest why we should learn lessons … But many people are more likely to listen now. Certainly, nothing should distract us from getting ahead of Covid-19. My concern is that we should come out of this much wiser.” The NHS is reported to have failed a government test of its ability to handle a pandemic, though the finding were not made public. Exercise Cygnus, a three-day dry run for a pandemic carried out in October 2016, examined how hospitals and other services would cope in a flu outbreak with a similar mortality rate to coronavirus. According to the Sunday Telegraph, ministers were told three years ago that Britain would be overwhelmed, suffering a lack of critical care beds, morgue capacity and personal protective equipment. Boyd said politicians found it tough to deliver large-scale preventive policies to a public unconcerned about major risks. “[They] often talk the talk but find it hard to walk the walk of the changes needed. As they are currently structured, governments are hopelessly underpowered to implement the about-turn needed on policy.” The 2018 biological security strategy, the UK’s first, stated: “The UK is globally renowned for the quality of our preparedness planning [for] significant biological risks.” It noted that the UK spends hundreds of millions of pounds a year on the issue. “However, these efforts have not always been as well coordinated as they could have been and we have sometimes failed to approach these issues with an international as well as a domestic perspective,” it said. As a result, “we may also fail to maximise the impact of our activities or to tackle issues as quickly as we need to”. The strategy said the UK maintained “appropriate stockpiles of clinical countermeasures for diseases of concern”, made it a priority “to protect first responders through ensuring that they are equipped and trained properly” and had “a strong public communications capability to ensure we are able to engage swiftly and clearly with the public about any action they might need to take”. As well as committing to improving government coordination and data sharing, and the communication of risk to the public, the strategy said: “We will develop a UK government response plan for major international diseases to ensure that the government is fully prepared to respond as quickly.” The UK was ranked second in the world in 2019 by the Global Health Security (GHS) Index, with the US first. The independent GHS Index assessed the capability to prevent and mitigate pandemics in 195 countries. In July 2019 the House of Commons joint committee on the national security strategy launched an inquiry into preparing for emerging infectious diseases. However, its first evidence session in October was postponed due to debates on Brexit and the calling of a general election. The December election meant the inquiry was cancelled. Catherine Rhodes, the head of the centre for the study of existential risk at Cambridge University, had been scheduled to give evidence to the MPs’ inquiry. She said the UK had had fairly good pandemic planning in place. “There does, however, seem to have been a significant gap between recognition of the risk and planning, and action on preparedness,” she said. “In particular, there could have been much better public communication in advance of the outbreak about the sort of measures that might be necessary in such a situation, and surge capacity in the NHS could have been substantially improved.” Opi Outhwaite, at St Mary’s law school in London, who was also scheduled to give evidence to the inquiry, said: ‘I think broadly that any government would likely have been overwhelmed by this outbreak.” But she said: “The risk of an outbreak of this type has been known for some time, while the biological security strategy seemed to have stalled. The response aspect of the strategy focuses a lot on deployment of expertise to other parts of the world. To me this emphasises the idea that we needed to be preparing to respond to outbreaks overseas, with less emphasis on what we would do once an outbreak crossed into the UK. “I suspect that we had to experience a pandemic here first-hand to shift the thinking. It’s very noticeable now hypothetical everything [in the strategy] appears.” A government spokesman said: “The UK has well-established and world-leading capabilities for dealing with disease outbreaks and pandemics. The UK influenza pandemic preparedness strategy reflects experience and lessons learned from previous pandemics and was used in developing the coronavirus action plan, guided by clinical and scientific advice.” Boyd said: “If there is a legacy of Covid-19, it might be that it is enough of a warning shot to enough people that it creates the political headroom for serious action.”
The public must stop congregating in public or face new coronavirus enforcement measures within 24 hours, Boris Johnson has said, amid growing concern that his previous attempts to encourage social distancing were being ignored. After a weekend of public alarm at pictures of groups spending time in parks, on beaches and at markets, the prime minister responded to mounting criticism of a mixed message from No 10 on Sunday with his most explicit warning yet that the UK could face an Italy-style lockdown. But amid growing unease among his own supporters over Downing Street’s communications with the public, he again stopped short of taking tougher action, saying: “We will think about this very actively in the next 24 hours. If people can’t make use of parks and playgrounds responsibly, in a way that observes the 2-metre rule, then of course we’re going to have to look at further measures.” In what appeared to be a warning that the draconian steps taken in Italy could be seen in the UK, he said: “We need to think about the kinds of measures that we’ve seen elsewhere, other countries that have been forced to bring in restrictions on people’s movements altogether.” The prime minister’s press conference came only after some councils and organisations had moved independently to close public spaces in response to widespread concern over the number of people out in public over the sunny weekend. It followed appeals for stronger steps from across the political spectrum, with London mayor Sadiq Khan and northern Ireland’s first minister Arlene Foster both endorsing stricter enforcement of the guidelines, and former northern Ireland secretary Julian Smith saying he would support any measure that would force people to follow the guidelines. The shadow health secretary, Jonathan Ashworth, said too many Britons were “either confused by the government’s social distancing measures or choose to ignore them”. Pressed on the issue during a daily briefing at which he announced no new measures, Johnson stressed that parks and other green spaces were vital for people’s mental and physical wellbeing, but also said the public should stay indoors wherever possible. As the official number of people in the UK to die after testing positive for the Covid-19 virus rose by 48 to reach 281:  Chains including McDonald’s, Waterstones, Primark and Patisserie Valerie said they would be closing their shops from Monday.  School leaders urged parents to “only leave your child at school if you have no choice” before the first day of attendance being limited to key workers’ families.  Doctors’ groups said hospitals were coming under such severe pressure that clinicians would soon be forced to decide which patients to treat.  ITV said it would stop filming Coronation Street and Emmerdale as broadcasters continued to adjust to the crisis.  An 18-year-old with an underlying condition became the youngest victim in the UK so far. Johnson addressed the media alongside Robert Jenrick, the communities secretary, who outlined the plans for 1.5 million people in England with underlying medical conditions to be advised via letter to self-isolate for 12 weeks, with provision made for them to be supplied with food and medicines as needed. Jenrick said community hubs would help organise care parcels, paid for by public funds, and that supermarkets might become involved. He said: “To begin with it’s going to be free to ensure that the people who really need it get the supplies as soon as possible.” Also speaking at Downing Street the deputy chief medical officer, Jenny Harries, warned against directly comparing the UK’s figures with those of Italy a fortnight ago. “We will look back in due course, sadly, and see the true number of people who have died from coronavirus,” she said. “But a direct comparison with another country and against individual numbers is something we should be very cautious of.” While some councils have announced the closure of playgrounds and even parks, Johnson said they should remain open for now, saying this was based on scientific advice. “What they’ve always said so far is that the health benefits for the whole of society of keeping the parks and the playgrounds open if we possibly can outweigh the epidemiological value of closing them,” he said. The prime minister said the situation would be “under constant, constant review,” but when asked whether police could be part of any response, he replied: “Police?” in apparent surprise. In a series of tweets, Ashworth said the messaging on social distancing was confusing, saying: “This cannot continue in a public health emergency.” He said: “We have called for and welcomed measures including banning mass gatherings and pub closures. But if social distancing measures are not working the government must take stronger action.” In the interim, devolved governments and councils have taken their own actions, in part to halt the flow of people to open spaces, but also to try to prevent urban dwellers from fleeing to more remote areas, potentially overwhelming local health services. Nicola Sturgeon announced that ferry companies to Scottish islands had been instructed not to carry tourists and other non-essential travellers. The Scottish first minister said hotels and holiday cottages should not take bookings for now. She said: “It may well be an understandable human instinct to think we can outrun a virus, but the fact is we can’t. What we do is we risk taking it to the places we go.” Visit Cornwall asked holidaymakers online to “please stay away” to help reduce the speed the virus was spreading and avoid “needless lives being lost”, while authorities in Wales made a similar plea. Some national parks and gardens closed as a weekend of good weather and Mother’s Day drew crowds. In London, Hammersmith and Fulham council said it was closing all its parks as they had been “full of people this weekend with a significant proportion ignoring government guidelines on social distancing”. The call for greater action came as the spring weather brought a slew of social media posts showing crowds of people gathered close together in many places, including food markets and at park kiosks. One green space features often in such photos, Victoria Park in east London, announced late on Sunday it was closing its playgrounds, skate park and cafes until further notice due to “unprecedented numbers” of visitors. With London seen as several weeks ahead of the rest of the UK in terms of infection rates, bishops in London said churches in the capital were to close altogether for now.