Mahsa Amini’s death could be the spark that ignites Iran around women’s rights
The country faces a litany of problems, from inflation to a democratic deficit, and the women’s movement is seen as an agent of change.
On the day that news of Mahsa Amini’s death spread throughout Iran, a young woman with a shaved head joined protesters who had gathered outside Kasra hospital, where Amini had lain in a coma since her violent arrest by Iran’s morality police days earlier.
In her hand she carried a plastic bag full of her long hair, shorn off in a gesture of solidarity with Amini and in defiance of the increasing crackdown on women by the regime.
A week later, and protests sparked by Amini’s death are raging in the province of Kurdistan and Tehran as well as cities such as Rasht, Isfahan and Qom, one of Iran’s most religiously conservative cities.
The rage across Iran at the brutal pointlessness of Amini’s death has lit the fires of protest and the increasing desperation of the authorities to extinguish it are, some believe, a sign of the growing strength and momentum of Iran’s women’s rights movement.
“Women’s issues have long been a catalyst for broader political action in Iran,” said Annabelle Sreberny, professor emeritus at the Iranian Studies Centre at Soas University of London. “This could be it. It could be the moment when people motivated by all the problems facing Iran today, like rising inflation, ecological crisis and lack of democratic participation, coalesce around these women’s issues to challenge the regime.”
During the past week women have been at the forefront of many of the demonstrations, shaving their heads and burning their headscarves in defiance of the strict hijab law and its brutal enforcement that led to 22-year-old Amini’s arrest and allegedly her death.
“The women’s movement in Iran started in the first month of the Islamic Republic and has been simmering for at least the last 20 years,” said Sreberny. “It is seen as a carrier of socially progressive values … many Iranians see the women’s movement as having the potential to be the next social force to make waves.”
Women have always been key to challenging the regime. Since online blogging became a popular form of everyday dissent a decade ago, women and LGBTQ+ people have dominated the sphere. Today, some of the most significant anti-regime movements were created by women in cyberspace, including My Stealthy Freedom, a Facebook page launched in 2014 by an Iranian feminist journalist living in exile, Masih Alinejad, which encouraged women to post hijab-less selfies.
The public removal of the state-mandated hijab has since become a universal sign of rejection of the regime, unifying Iranians from across the religious spectrum. For months before Amini’s arrest and death, women had been converging under anti-hijab protest hashtags on social media, posting videos of themselves walking with their heads uncovered or being harassed on the streets. In the weeks before Amini’s arrest for failing to correctly wear the hijab, the authorities had carried out a spate of arrests, beatings and forced public confessions of women.
Among them was Sepideh Rashno, a 28-year-old woman who was detained after a video showing her on a bus with her hair uncovered went viral. Rashno was reportedly beaten during her detention and forced to apologise on national television.
“Control of the female body and oppression of women is not just a matter of policy of the current government,” said Azadeh Akbari, a researcher at the University of Twente in the Netherlands, “It is existential to the Islamic Republic and fundamental to its founding ideology.
“These are protests against the compulsory hijab and controlling women. They have support even among women who believe in Islam and who choose to wear it, but they don’t agree with the compulsory hijab and they definitely don’t agree with the violence which is used to enforce it,” said Akbari.
The hijab, a headscarf worn by Muslim women, became mandatory in Iran after the 1979 Islamic Revolution, which led to the overthrow of the shah and the instalment of Ayatollah Khomeini as the country’s supreme leader. Laws regulating women’s behaviour and restricting their participation in public life became a hallmark of the regime, as female liberation was presented as a force of western cultural imperialism.
Iran marchers call for execution of anti-government protesters
Army signals it is prepared to crush dissent after unrest over death of Mahsa Amini in police custody.
Pro-government rallies have taken place in several cities across Iran in an attempt to counter a week of mounting unrest triggered by the death of a woman in police custody.
Marchers called for anti-government protesters to be executed, while the army signalled that it was prepared to crush dissent by telling Iranians that it would confront “the enemies” behind the unrest.
Demonstrators condemned the anti-government protesters as “Israel’s soldiers”, live state television coverage showed. They also shouted “Death to America” and “Death to Israel”, common slogans the country’s clerical rulers use to try and stir up support for authorities, who claimed the demonstrations of support were spontaneous. “Offenders of the Qur’an must be executed,” the crowds chanted.
A state TV anchor said the death toll in the protests that erupted last Saturday after the funeral of 22-year-old Mahsa Amini could be as high as 26, without elaborating on how that figure was reached. Anti-government protesters voicing pent-up anger over social and political repression have taken to the streets in several major cities in the most severe political unrest since 2019, when rights groups say hundreds were killed amid demonstrations against a hike in state-controlled petrol prices.
Videos on social media show protesters in Tehran torching a police car and confronting officers at close range. Elsewhere in the capital, videos show gunfire sounding out as protesters bolt from riot police, shouting: “They are shooting at people! Oh my God, they’re killing people!”
In the north-western city of Neyshabur, protesters cheered over an overturned police car. Footage from Tehran and Mashhad shows women waving their obligatory headscarves, known as hijab, in the air like flags while chanting: “Freedom!”
Amini was pronounced dead on 16 September, three days after being arrested by Tehran’s “morality police”. Her family and protesters say she died from injuries sustained in a beating by police. Iranian authorities say an initial coroner’s investigation showed she died from heart failure or a stroke.
“The death has tapped into broader anti-government sentiment in the Islamic republic and especially the frustration of women,” the political risk firm Eurasia Group wrote, noting that Iran’s hardliners had intensified their crackdown on women’s clothing over the past year since the former judiciary chief Ebrahim Raisi became president.
“The prospect of the leadership offering concessions to Iranian women is minimal,” it said. “In the cold calculus of Iranian leaders, the protests have likely gone far enough and a more forceful response is required to quell the unrest.”
Raisi, who on Friday told Iranian TV that the pro-government marches showed the power of the Islamic republic, on Thursday told a news conference on the sidelines of the UN general assembly in New York that Amini’s death “must be steadfastly investigated”.
“Our utmost preoccupation is the safeguarding of the rights of every citizen,” Raisi said. “If her death was due to negligence, it will definitely be investigated, and I promise to follow up on the issue regardless of whether the international forums take a stand or not.”
Raisi said Iran would not tolerate “acts of chaos”, referring to the six nights of protests, and sought to turn the tables on the country he was visiting by asking about police shootings in the US. “Did all these deaths get investigated?” he said.
The Iranian judiciary has ordered the courts to take a tough line with protesters, claiming the demonstrators were being led by foreign agents and stirred by anti-Iranian social media – a familiar accusation levelled by the regime when dissent breaks out.
The US announced on Friday it was easing export restrictions to improve Iranians’ access to the internet, which the Tehran government has severely hampered since Amini’s death in what the US said was a bid “to prevent the world from watching its violent crackdown on peaceful protesters”.
“In the face of these steps, we are going to help make sure the Iranian people are not kept isolated and in the dark,” the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said. “This is a concrete step to provide meaningful support to Iranians demanding that their basic rights be respected.”
Amini was detained for allegedly wearing a hijab in an “improper” way. As part of the protest action, Iranian women have taken to the streets and the internet, burning their headscarves and cutting their hair.
US to expand internet access to help Iranians evade state surveillance
Changes in internet access aims to ‘support for the free flow of information to the Iranian people’ after death of Mahsa Amini.
The US Treasury Department on Friday issued guidance expanding the range of internet services available to Iranians despite US sanctions on the country, amid protests around Iran after the death of a 22-year-old woman in custody.
Officials said the move would help Iranians access tools that can be used to circumvent state surveillance and censorship, but would not entirely prevent Tehran from using communications tools to stifle dissent, as it did by cutting off internet access for most citizens on Wednesday.
“As courageous Iranians take to the streets to protest the death of Mahsa Amini, the United States is redoubling its support for the free flow of information to the Iranian people” Deputy US Treasury Secretary Wally Adeyemo said.
“With these changes, we are helping the Iranian people be better equipped to counter the government’s efforts to surveil and censor them.”
Adeyemo added that Washington in coming weeks would continue to issue guidance.
Public outrage in Iran over Mahsa Amini’s death last week showed no sign of abating after days of protests in Tehran and other cities, with protesters torching police stations and vehicles earlier on Thursday and reports of security forces coming under attack.
Amini, a Kurdish woman, was arrested by the morality police in Tehran for wearing “unsuitable attire” and fell into a coma while in detention. The authorities have said they would investigate the cause of her death.
Internet monitoring group NetBlocks on Thursday said a new mobile internet disruption has been registered in Iran, where access to social media and some content is tightly restricted. NetBlocks reported “near-total” disruption to internet connectivity in the capital of the Kurdish region on Monday, linking it to the protests.
Washington has long provided some internet-related exceptions to its sanctions on Iran, but Friday’s update to the general license seeks to modernize them, the Treasury said.
The new license includes social media platforms and video conferencing and expands access to cloud-based services used to deliver virtual private networks (VPNs), which provide users with anonymity online, and other anti-surveillance tools, according to a Treasury official who briefed reporters on the license on condition of anonymity.
The license also continues to authorize anti-virus, anti-malware and anti-tracking software, the Treasury said, and removes a previous condition that communications be “personal” to ease compliance for companies.
Asked how the expanded license would help Iranians if their government again shuts down internet access, a State Department official also briefing reporters said Iran’s government would still have “repressive tools for communication.“
The new license makes it “easier for the Iranian people to confront some of those oppressive tools,” the official said. “It doesn’t mean that they don’t exist anymore.“
SpaceX CEO Elon Musk responded to a tweet from Secretary of State Antony Blinken about the new license on Friday with the comment “Activating Starlink,” a reference to the firm’s satellite broadband service – already provided to Ukraine for its fight against Russia’s invasion.
Musk said on Monday his company would provide Starlink to Iranians, and would ask for a sanctions exception to do so.
The Treasury official briefing reporters said Starlink’s commercial-grade system, which would involve sending hardware into Iran, would not be covered by the general license.
“That would be something that they would need to write into Treasury for,” the official said.
Rage against the regime: how Iran erupted after the death of Mahsa Amini
A timeline of the witness accounts, reports by journalists and social media that have tracked the protests sweeping Iran since the young Kurdish woman died at the hands of the morality police.
by Maryam Foumani
Mahsa Amini, a 22-year-old Kurdish woman, died in police custody after being arrested by police under Iran’s harsh hijab laws. In the following days large protests erupted across Iran.
Friday 16 September
The first protest, in front of Kasra hospital, began shortly after news of Mahsa Amini’s death was published. Amini had been taken to the hospital from the police detention centre after her arrest.
Based on videos and witness accounts, dozens of people gathered in front of the hospital and the surrounding streets, some chanting “Death to the dictator”, while the authorities closed the roads leading to the hospital. Other protesters gathered around the city’s Arjantin Square near the hospital, chanting slogans such as “I swear by Mahsa’s blood, Iran will be free” and “Khamenei is a murderer, his government is invalid”.
Journalists at the hospital reported that several arrests were made throughout the evening. In Arjantin Square a young girl with a shaved head, her hair in a plastic bag, shouted in protest at Amini’s death.
Over the next few days, the movement grew, with other women also cutting their hair – something that is considered forbidden by some Islamic authorities – and posting the videos on social media.
In parts of Tehran, chants could be heard from the rooftops and from inside homes: “Death to Khamenei” and “Death to the dictator”.
Amini’s body was taken to her home town in Saqqez for burial at night.
Saturday 17 September
In Saqqez, thousands of people attended Amini’s funeral. Women took off their headscarves en masse in the presence of police officers and chanted against mandatory hijabs. Men and women marched to the governor’s building in Saqqez after Amini’s burial. Many protesters were beaten, and at least 13 were hit by gunfire.
Sunday 18 September
The protests spread to Sanandaj, the capital of Kurdistan province. Police attacked protesters with batons and teargas. Gunshots were reported in some parts of the city.
In Tehran University, dozens of students marched in the university grounds chanting “Women, life, freedom”.
In remarkable scenes, protesters, men as well as women, chanted slogans denouncing the violent suppression of women.
Monday 19 September – Tehran
In Tehran, male and female students staged rallies at seven universities.
Slogans such as “We do not want the Islamic Republic” and “We don’t want forced hijab” could be heard around central Tehran.
Security forces used teargas, batons and water cannon to disperse the crowds. Some pictures and reports indicate that shots were fired at the protesters, and several were injured.
In videos taken at the protest, dozens of women took off their headscarves, waving them above their heads and chanting “death to the dictator”. Photos show protesters forming a human chain and standing in front of dozens of armed police officers.
Photos on social media showed protesters setting fire to at least one police patrol van. Reports from Tehran indicate that dozens of protesters were detained.
A witness in Tehran told the Guardian that by 8pm, the crowd around Vali Asr Square numbered 3,000 to 4,000 people, both men and women.
“The crowd that initially gathered on Abdullah Zadeh Street near the Hejab intersection was about 50 to 100 people. The IRGC [Revolutionary Guards], wearing black uniforms and riding motorcycles, kept attacking the crowd and dispersed them, however, the people gathered in another street a few minutes later.
“At the same time, the number of protesters had increased in the streets of 16 Azar and Italia, it was difficult for the security forces to deal with the people. I even saw twice with my eyes that people pushed the security forces back by throwing stones and forcing them to flee.”
The witness also told the Guardian that protesters delayed the advance and attacks by security services by setting fire to waste bins and using cars to block streets.
From 9.30pm, security reinforcements arrived and fired on the protesters. A witness says police officers wearing green uniforms were attacking people with batons, and the Revolutionary Guards were shooting at people with teargas and bullets.
A witness said many women in the rally had scarves around their necks and were not wearing hijab. Some women started to form a small circle, waving their headscarves in the air. According to the witness, police on motorcycles attacked the circle of women, firing teargas canisters in an attempt to get them to disperse but the women continued to protest.
A girl took off her scarf on Keshavarz Boulevard, and stood on top of a concrete platform holding the scarf in her hand in an act of defiance and protest that echoed an image of Vida Movahedi, a young Iranian woman who was photographed waving her hijab on a pole above the crowd during demonstrations in 2017 before being arrested.
Witnesses say the girl was pulled down and beaten by the police but she continued to refuse to cover her hair. The extent of her injuries or whether she was later arrested is unknown.
Yalda Meiri, a press photographer, posted on Instagram that she had been arrested at a protest on Hejab Street and was being taken in a van to an unknown location with dozens of others.
Relatives of those detained at the protests say many were transferred to the base of the Basij pro-government militia in Hor Square but there is no official information about the numbers arrested or where or how they are being detained.
A commemoration of Mahsa Amini was held in the women’s wing of Evin prison in Tehran. Aliyeh Motallebzadeh, a photographer and women’s rights activist imprisoned there, reported that about 40 women political prisoners gathered in the courtyard to stage a protest.
Monday 19 September – Kurdistan
Civil society groups in Iran’s Kurdistan province supported the call of political parties in the region for a general strike.
Shops were closed across the provinces of Kurdistan West Azerbaijan and Kermanshah, especially in cities, including Sanandaj, Mahabad, Ashnoye, Saqqez, Marivan, Bukan, Piranshahr, Kamyaran, Ravansar and Paveh.
Kaveh Kermanshahi, a Berlin-based director of the Kurdistan Human Rights Network, said that at least three Kurdish citizens were killed after security forces opened fire on crowds. Mohsen Mohammadi, Faridun Mahmoudi and Reza Lotfi were killed during protests in the cities of Diwandara, Saqqez and Dehgolan in Kurdistan province. Their families have reportedly been threatened by the security forces for talking to the media and human rights organisations, and for holding a public funeral.
Kermanshahi said more than 85 people were wounded in the protests on 19 September in cities across Kurdistan, and at least 215 people were arrested. Among those wounded and arrested are several children under the age of 18, including a 10-year-old girl who was shot and seriously wounded by government forces in Bukan.
Based on reliable reports received by the Kurdistan Human Rights Network, Kermanshahi said, some protesters who were wounded in beatings and gunfire from the security forces have been detained without treatment and have not been transferred to hospital.
The security forces have also threatened to arrest Kurdish activists if they take part in protests and strikes. At least five female activists have been detained in Sanandaj and two civil activists in Marivan. Mobile phone signals and the internet were cut off in a number of cities in Kurdistan.
According to Front Line Defenders, an international human rights organisation, at least eight women’s rights and civil rights activists have been arrested in Kurdistan province. They confirmed the arrest of four women – Baran Sae’di, Mahrou Hedayati, Bahareh Zangiband and Azadeh Jama’ati.
Also arrested are the environmental campaigner Farank Rafie, and a civil rights activist called Lotfollah Ahmadi in Sanandaj; as well as two civil rights defenders, Ribvar Kamranipour and Amjad Sae’di, in Marivan, Kurdistan province.
19 September – Other cities
Protests reached the city of Rasht, in the province of Gilan, where demonstrators chanted “Death to Khamenei”. In one of the videos, protesters forced the security forces to retreat. According to police sources, 22 people were arrested there.
Videos on social media showed people in the streets of Mashhad shouting “We are all Mahsa, fight to fight” and “The mullah must get lost”.
Tuesday 20 September
As well as anger about the death of Amini and demands for the abolition of the mandatory hijab, protesters also shouted against Ali Khamenei, Iran’s “supreme leader”, as well as against repression and human rights violations, and the country’s political establishment. “Death to the Islamic Republic” and “Death to the dictator” are heard at most gatherings.
Fatemeh Karim, of Kurdistan Human Rights Network, confirmed that three more protesters died after being shot by anti-riot forces. Farjad Darvishi, a 23-year-old, was killed in the Vali Asr neighbourhood of Urmia, and 16-year-old Zakariya Khiyal in Piranshahr, both in West Azerbaijan province.
Students gathered in some universities in Tehran, Karaj, Yazd and Tabriz. Pictures of the protest at Shahid Beheshti University of Tehran on social media show female students setting fire to their veils. Footage from Kharazmi University in Karaj shows students stamping on a picture of Ali Khamenei.
Demonstrations spread to many cities and towns, including Kermanshah, Zanjan, Bandar Abbas, Qazvin, Rafsanjan, Kerman, Sari, Urmia, Hamadan, Kish and Shiraz. In Qom, a particularly conservative city, protesters were on the streets, and some women took off their headscarves and twirled them in the air.
Protests also flared in Tehran market, the scene of demonstrations that proved a turning point in the 1979 revolution.
Wednesday 21 September
According to Kurdistan Human Rights Network, a man named Fouad Qadimi, who was shot by security forces on 19 September in Diwandara, died from his wounds at Kowsar hospital in Sanandaj, Kurdistan province.
Security officers arrested Zina Modares Gurji, a women’s rights activist in Sanandaj. Nilufar Hamedi, a reporter for Al Sharq newspaper, was arrested in Tehran. She was one of the first journalists to break the story about Mehsa Amini after she was transferred to Kasri hospital.
Fatemeh Sepehri, a civil activist critical of Ali Khamenei, and Mansoure Mousavi, a sociologist and women’s activist, are among tthose arrested in Mashhad.
Iran Human Rights (IHR), based in Norway, said that during the clashes on the night of 21 September, about 60 men and six women were arrested and transferred to Amol prison.
Most of the protesters are young but older people, especially women, have also taken to the streets. Images of elderly women chanting slogans or defending protesters against the attacks of security agents have been published many times in recent days, including a video of an elderly woman in the city of Rasht removing her headscarf and chanting: “Death to Khamenei.”
In Zahedan, Sistan and Baluchistan province, a young woman on top of a car removes her headscarf and cuts her hair as protesters chant: “Death to the dictator.” Women also burned their veils in the city of Qaemshahr, Mazandaran province.
Protesters charged at riot police and forced them to retreat in the city of Amol, also in Mazandaran province. This has happened in other cities as well, with several videos showing protesters forcing police to retreat by throwing stones or running at them. Others show protesters setting police cars on fire. In Azadi Square, Nowshahr, Mazandaran province, protesters attacked three riot police vehicles.
Thursday 22 September
IHR reported the death of at least 31 protesters between 16 and 22 September. The organisation confirms all deaths by contacting relatives, eyewitnesses or medical staff in hospital, according to Mahmood Amiri-Moghaddam, director of IHR. He also said they had received more names of those killed, but were awaiting confirmation.
According to news published by university organisations, dozens of students have been arrested in Tehran and other cities. Bardia Shakuri Fard from Tehran University, Mohammad Arab from Babol Noshirvani University of Technology and Mehrdad Arandan from Allameh Tabataba’i University are among those arrested.
More than 530 people have been arrested in Kurdish regions of Iran, including Kurdistan, Kermanshah, Ilam and West Azerbaijan provinces, during the past week, Fatemeh Karim of Kurdistan Human Rights Network told the Guardian.
According to reports from different parts of Iran, the violence has intensified as protests have spread. There have been reports of live ammunition and Kalashnikov assault rifles being used in some cities. Arrests have become widespread, while internet speed and access to some social media has been cut or limited.
Friday 23 September
A new wave of arrests targeting civil and political activists, journalists and students has begun, initially in Kurdistan but spreading across the country.
Reports of deaths and injuries are increasing but there are still no official figures and verification of the size of the protests and the numbers detained is proving difficult due to internet blackouts and the targeting of civil society.
Other footage posted on social media show families sheltering protesters attempting to flee from the police. In one, police are seen breaking down the door of the house where protesters are hiding.
A witness from Tehran said: “Last night, numerous women and men in the Vanak neighbourhood went to the roof of buildings and chanted: ‘Death to the dictator’ and ‘woman, life, freedom.’
“During these demonstrations, I saw the IRGC [Revolutionary Guards] forces suddenly attack a car,” the witness said. “The driver was a woman; she sounded her horn in support of people protesting in the street. [The police] violently threw that woman out of the car and arrested her.
“I have witnessed the police arrest people in incredibly violent ways. Our people are fighting against the military forces with only their bare hands. Yet they shoot people, stand in front of hospitals to check who is transferred, and then arrest them.”
Iran president says death in custody of Mahsa Amini must be investigated
Ebrahim Raisi says he has contacted Kurdish woman’s family but laments western double standards on human rights.
The death in custody in Iran of a Kurdish woman that led to widespread protests must be “steadfastly” investigated, Iran’s president has said, as he lamented what he claimed were western “double standards” on human rights.
Ebrahim Raisi told a news conference on the sidelines of the UN general assembly in New York that the death of Mahsa Amini while in the custody of Iran’s morality police “must certainly be investigated”.
“I contacted her family at the very first opportunity and I assured them we would continue steadfastly to investigate that incident … Our utmost preoccupation is the safeguarding of the rights of every citizen.”
Of Amini’s death, he said authorities were doing what they needed to do and that responsibility now lay in the hands of the judiciary. He claimed the initial coroner’s investigations into the death of Amini showed she died from heart failure or a brain stroke, and not a physical beating by the morality police.
But he said: “If her death was due to negligence, it will definitely be investigated, and I promise to follow up on the issue regardless of whether the international forums take a stand or not.”
Protesters reject the state’s conclusions, pointing to reports that officers beat Amini’s head with a baton and banged her head against one of their vehicles.
At least 36 people are feared by rights groups to have died in six days of protests, sparked by the death on 16 September of the 22-year-old Kurdish woman.
On Thursday, protesters torched police stations and vehicles in several cities, and Iran shut off the internet in parts of Tehran and Kurdistan, and blocked access to platforms such as Instagram and WhatsApp, in an attempt to curb a growing protest movement. Iranian women have taken to the streets and the internet to burn their headscarves and cut their hair.
Amini was detained for allegedly wearing a hijab headscarf in an “improper” way. Activists said the woman, whose Kurdish first name is Jhina, had suffered a fatal blow to the head, a claim denied by officials, who have announced an investigation. Police continue to maintain she died of natural causes, but her family suspect she was subjected to beating and torture.
Raisi, a former hardline head of the judiciary accused of sending hundreds to their death in the past, said Iran would not tolerate “acts of chaos”, referring to the six nights of protests over her killing, but said his country accepted lawful protest.
The judiciary has ordered the courts to take a tough line with protesters, claiming the protests are now being led by foreign agents and stirred by anti-Iranian social media, a familiar regime accusation when dissent breaks out.
He sought to turn the tables on the country he was visiting by asking about police shootings in the US. “Did all these deaths get investigated?” he asked.
“Every day, in different countries, including the United States, we see men and women dying in police encounters, but there is no sensitivity about the cause and dealing with this violence,” he added.
The scope of Iran’s ongoing unrest, the worst in several years, still remains unclear as protesters in more than 12 cities – venting anger over social repression and the country’s mounting crises – continue to encounter security and paramilitary forces. The Iranian army said on Friday it would “confront the enemies” to ensure security, the toughest warning yet to the protesters.
Raisi, who addressed the general assembly formally on Wednesday, said bad things happened to people at the hands of authorities everywhere, making vague references to the US and the UK. He called for the “same standard” around the world in dealing with such deaths at the hands of authorities.
Raisi’s comparison reflects a common approach by Iranian leaders, who when confronted with accusations of rights violations often point to western society and its “hegemony” and demand that those nations similarly be held accountable.
The protests have grown into an open challenge to the government, with some Iranians calling for the downfall of the Islamic Republic itself. They are the most serious demonstrations since 2019, when protests erupted over a government hike in the price of gasoline.
While not outright condemning the protests, Raisi said: “What is occurring, having demonstrations … of course these are normal and fully accepted … We must differentiate between demonstrators and vandalism. Demonstrations are good for expressing specific issues.”
The US imposed sanctions on the morality police and leaders of other Iranian security agencies on Thursday, saying they “routinely employ violence to suppress peaceful protesters”. US officials promised to take further measures in the coming days.
Erfan Mortezaei, Amini’s cousin, told the IranWire website that the dead woman’s family were still under pressure to publicly back the regime’s version of events: namely that she did not die because of head injuries sustained in custody, but from complications from a historic brain surgery.
At the weekend Mahsa’s nephew Arkan, 17, was taken into custody. He was released on Thursday morning on a 500m toman (US$16,000) bail. The judiciary told the family it was because he had gone to the offices of a news agency based in the city, presumably intending to speak to them about his aunt.
“The goal of this pressure,” Erfan said, “is to obtain a forced statement from Mahsa’s family in view of stopping the nationwide protests.”
Nasser Kanani, the spokesperson of the Islamic Republic’s ministry of foreign affairs, wrote in a tweet without referring to the nationwide protests in Iran: “The real violators of human rights do not have the necessary moral competence to comment on human rights.”
In an index of the scale of the riots the mayor of Tehran, Alireza Zakani, claimed damage had been inflicted on 43 buses, 54 bus stations and 23 fire engines.
The protests have no organised leadership and although the focus initially has been on the right of women not to wear the hijab in public or be harassed by the morality police, there have been broader calls for freedom, or overthrow of the regime.
Iranian officials have been trying to drive a wedge into popular support for the protests by emphasising its anti-Iranian violence.
US-based human rights groups had been trying to serve a writ on Raisi on behalf of former political prisoners including Kylie Moore-Gilbert, the British-Australian dual national kept in jail for two years.
Iran blocks capital’s internet access as Amini protests grow
Social media platforms have also been cut off in areas of Tehran and Kurdistan as videos of dissent go viral.
Iran has shut off the internet in parts of Tehran and Kurdistan, and blocked access to platforms such as Instagram and WhatsApp, in an attempt to curb a growing protest movement that has relied on social media to document dissent.
The protests, which were sparked on 16 September after the death of a 22-year-old Kurdish woman in police custody, show no sign of subsiding. On Thursday, protesters torched police stations and vehicles in several cities.
This comes as anti-regime demonstrations spilled into cyberspace, with videos of women burning their hijabs going viral. Other women have been posting emotional videos in which they cut their hair in protest under the hashtag #Mahsa_Amini.
Mahsa Amini was detained on 16 September for allegedly wearing a hijab headscarf in an “improper” way. Activists said the woman, whose Kurdish first name is Jhina, had suffered a fatal blow to the head, a claim denied by officials, who have announced an investigation. Police continue to maintain that she died of natural causes, but her family suspect that she was subjected to beating and torture.
In response to her death, the US placed Iran’s morality police on its sanctions blacklist on Thursday.
The US Treasury said the morality police were “responsible” for Amini’s death as it announced the sanctions “for abuse and violence against Iranian women and the violation of the rights of peaceful Iranian protesters”.
Iranian state media reported that by Wednesday street rallies had spread to 15 cities, with police using teargas and making arrests to disperse crowds of up to 1,000 people.
In southern Iran, video footage purportedly from Wednesday showed demonstrators setting fire to a gigantic picture on the side of a building of general Qassem Soleimani, the revered Revolutionary Guards commander, who was killed in a 2020 US strike in Iraq.
Demonstrators hurled stones at security forces, set fire to police vehicles and bins and chanted anti-government slogans, the official Irna news agency said.
On Thursday, Iranian media said three militiamen “mobilised to deal with rioters” were stabbed or shot dead in the north-western city of Tabriz, the central city of Qazvin and Mashhad in the north-east of the country.
A fourth member of the security forces died in the southern city of Shiraz, Iranian news agencies reported, adding that a protester was stabbed to death in Qazvin, adding to six protester deaths already announced by officials.
The Iranian authorities have denied any involvement in the deaths of protesters.
Amnesty International said it had recorded the deaths of eight people – six men, one woman and a child – with four shot by security forces at close range with metal pellets.
The protests are among the most serious in Iran since November 2019 unrest over fuel price rises.
“The internet shutdowns must be understood as an extension of the violence and repression that is happening in physical space,” said Azadeh Akbari, a researcher of cybersurveillance at the University of Twente, in the Netherlands. “Social media is existential to the mobilisation of protesters, not only to coordinate gatherings but also to amplify acts of resistance.
“You see a woman standing without her hijab in front of the anti-insurgency police, which is very courageous. If a video of this comes out, it’s suddenly not just one person doing this, women in all the different cities are doing the same.”
“Women, life, freedom”, the words which could be heard at Amini’s funeral, have been repeated by protesters across the country, including in a video which shows young women burning their hijabs while male protesters fight off security forces. The video has received over 30,000 views on Twitter.
In a different video, an Iranian woman sings a hymn to fallen youth as she cuts her hair with household scissors, which has amassed more than 60,000 views.
“[The videos] are a hundred percent valuable,” one young Twitter user from Iran told the Guardian, adding that while the protests had not reached her home town, she had been able to participate in opposition activity online. “I am sad that my compatriots in other parts of Iran have come to the streets and are fighting against this regime for all our rights. And I can’t do anything except share information online.”
She added that videos showing police brutality towards protesters were motivating people in different cities to take action.
“It is very difficult for the regime to control the videos coming out. Many people don’t post them on social media, but circulate them within WhatsApp groups, etc. The demonstrations are happening simultaneously in cyberspace and in the physical space.”
Social media has long been one of the key tools for anti-regime activity, as public spaces are closely policed by security forces. “Platforms like Instagram became the virtual street, where we can gather to protest, because it was not possible to do that in real life,” said Shaghayegh Norouzi, an Iranian campaigner against gender-based violence who has been living in exile in Spain.
Norouzi said that while she had been able to keep in touch with activists in Tehran, she was afraid of future internet blackouts and what they could mean for the safety of activists.
“During the last protests [2017-2019], the government cut off internet for days at a time. During that time, protesters were killed and arrested,” she said. “Protesters are also using the internet to organise themselves. They can call each other and say when they are in danger or warn each other.”
Iran‘s powerful Revolutionary Guard Corps called on the judiciary to prosecute “those who spread false news and rumours” in a statement published on Thursday.
Amini’s death came amid a governmental crackdown on women’s rights. On 15 August, Iran’s hardline president, Ebrahim Raisi, signed a decree which, among other measures, increased the punishment for women posting anti-hijab content online.
Speaking at a briefing with some western reporters on the sidelines of the UN general assembly, Raisi said the circumstances of Amini’s death were under investigation.
The early signs from the investigation showed there had been no beatings or violence that led to her death, he said. “All signs point to a heart attack or brain stroke,” he said, but he stressed “that is not the final determination”.
He said deaths by police violence had occurred hundreds of times in the US, and also in the UK.
Akbari said that at the same time as targeting women’s rights, the Iranian government was tightening its cyber-regime. She fears that continued internet blackouts could be used to facilitate an expansion of the Iranian national internet, which is cut off from the rest of the world.
“This is a very dangerous plan, which would see the regime completely cut off Iran from the global internet in the near future,” she said. “This would allow the regime to control cyberspace along with policing the physical space, and develop an all-pervasive machinery of control.”
The Guardian view on Iran’s protests: a moment of rage, a chain of resistance
The death of a 22-year-old woman last week has sparked unprecedented outrage, but the causes and resistance are deep-rooted.
A week of protests has swept Iran, reaching scores of cities and more than half of its provinces. The images are both stirring and moving: a mother, defiantly unveiling beside young daughters; hijab-wearers standing with those consigning their scarves to the flames; women taking to the streets despite facing brutal beatings, teargas and armed police. The unrest erupted over the death of 22-year-old Mahsa Amini after her arrest by the morality police, who accused her of “inappropriate hijab”. Her family have hotly contested official claims that she died from a heart attack due to underlying conditions. Those who have previously been detained – or whose daughters, aunts or friends have been held – saw not a terrible anomaly but a systemic issue.
Protests on this scale centring women’s rights are extraordinary. Men too are joining the female-led movement. Those involved are more demographically diverse than in recent unrest. The primary demand is not an end to the hijab, but to its imposition. Iran has a long history of ruling on what women can wear: in the 1930s, prohibiting the hijab; after 1979’s revolution, making it mandatory. The details and enforcement of the compulsory dress code have varied over the years; under President Ebrahim Raisi, a hardliner, policing has become harsher. Yet protesters’ cries of “women, life, freedom” go beyond the initial complaint to other concerns about liberty and rights, and a broader sense of injustice – US sanctions have ravaged the economy and, as everywhere, when poverty hits, women have suffered most.
Despite some initially conciliatory gestures and statements, authorities appear to be moving towards increased repression: a familiar pattern of attempting to contain dissent, then cracking down on it. Several people have already died and with severe internet restrictions now in place, toughened rhetoric from the Revolutionary Guard, and the president’s return from the spotlight at the UN general assembly in New York, the fear is of significant escalation. The regime has repeatedly massacred its own citizens.
That knowledge darkens this moment; it does not lessen it. This outpouring of anger is remarkable, though it should not be treated as an anomaly. Women came on to the streets in 1979 to protest against the imposition of the hijab, and in subsequent decades there have been brave acts of individual and collective resistance on this and other issues affecting women. Women have often played an important role in protests. The story of repression is also a story of resilience.
But only in recent years – particularly in the aftermath of the crackdown on activism following 2009’s green movement – has the compulsory hijab and its enforcement become so openly criticised. In recent days even clerics and conservative politicians have questioned how the dress code is implemented. The regime does not want to be seen to cave; if it reins in the morality police, it is only likely to do so after a crackdown. And many believe that policing women’s bodies is not incidental to its political project, but a central part of it, helping to define it.
Since the regime portrays opposition as the work of outsiders or their stooges, grand statements from western leaders – especially those immiserating Iran – are not always helpful: principled, multilateral pressure is a better course. Pragmatic efforts to bolster internet access would be helpful. Outsiders should also focus on magnifying the voices of Iran’s courageous women. Their leaders do not listen to them. We must.
Iran sends police to end Mahsa Amini protests as reports say seven killed
Internet blackouts and Instagram blocks also reported amid anger after 22-year-old woman’s death in custody.
Iran has sent police on to the streets in a scramble to end protests that have spread to at least 15 cities, as rights groups and local media reported up to seven people had been killed in crackdowns.
There were reports of internet blackouts in parts of the country while Instagram accounts with Iranian IP addresses were also blocked in an apparent attempt to quell growing anger.
The telecommunications minister, Issa Zarepour, was quoted by the official Irna news agency as saying there had been some “temporary restrictions in some places and at some hours”.
State media reported that police used teargas and made arrests to disperse crowds of up to 1,000 people on Tuesday evening. Irna claimed demonstrators had hurled stones at security forces and set fire to police vehicles.
Protests have engulfed parts of the country over the past five days after the death in custody of 22-year-old Mahsa Amini, who was arrested by the morality police for not wearing the hijab appropriately.
Irna said a “police assistant” died of injuries on Tuesday in the southern city of Shiraz. And a Kurdish human rights group, Hengaw, said two more people had been killed by police, raising the claimed death toll since Amini’s death to six.
An additional 450 people had been wounded and 500 arrested, the group said, figures that could not be independently verified.
Demonstrations have rocked the country. Social media has shown women being cornered by helmeted men on motorbikes and beaten.
Many women had taken off their headscarves in protest against the morality police, who have been enforcing the hijab in line with a decree issued by the new leadership of the president, Ebrahim Raisi.
Speaking at the UN general assembly in New York on Wednesday, Raisi did not mention the demonstrations or Amini by name but criticised western countries for their reactions to “an incident under investigation in Iran”.
Iranian officials say they are conducting an inquiry into the cause of Amini’s death. However, the protesters have little faith in an internal investigation and want the morality police abolished.
On Wednesday, the country’s supreme leader gave a televised speech in which he did not mention the protests but warned how young people should not “fall for western powers’ deception”. Tehran repeatedly blames its internal issues on meddling by its international enemies.
Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, 83, who is subject of persistent reports of failing health, showed no clear sign of physical frailty in a near hour-long address.
In New York on Tuesday, Raisi met the French president, Emmanuel Macron, and told him the continued UN nuclear inspectorate inquiry into the origins of unexplained nuclear particles in three Iranian sites was a serious obstacle to a revival of a nuclear agreement. Iran wants the investigation halted.
Jake Sullivan, the US national security adviser, said he did not expect a breakthrough in the round of meetings with Iranian and US officials in New York. No meeting is planned between Raisi and the US president, Joe Biden.
In his UN speech on Wednesday, his first as president, there was little content to suggest Raisi was prepared to make further compromises to reach a deal with Washington, saying it was necessary for Iran to be provided with fresh guarantees that sanctions will not be reimposed by the US.
Biden has given that assurance so long as Iran remains in compliance with restrictions on its nuclear programme, sanctions will not be reimposed, but he cannot bind future US leaders.
Raisi said the US “maximum pressure policy” had suffered an embarrassing defeat and Iran would, if necessary, find its way without any renewed nuclear agreement.
He pointed out that Khamenei had issued a fatwa insisting Iran had no plan to create a nuclear bomb, and that its programme was purely for civil and peaceful purposes.
A sharia-based fatwa was more valuable than any agreement, he said. “The Islamic Republic of Iran does not seek to build or obtain nuclear weapons and these weapons have no place in our doctrine.”
Just as he rose to speak, the Israeli ambassador to the UN, Gilad Erdan, walked out. In a CBS interview, Raisi claimed further investigations were required to determine if the Holocaust happened.
In 35-minute speech, one of the longest delivered to the general assembly this year, he accused “Zionist oppressors” of forming the biggest prison in the world in Gaza and using savagery over seven decades to expand illegal settlements on Palestinian land.
Biden, speaking after Raisi, repeated: “America is ready to return to the JCPOA [joint comprehensive plan of action] unilaterally, if Iran fulfils its obligations. America has said clearly that we will not allow Iran to get nuclear weapons. I still believe that diplomacy is the best way to achieve this goal.”
Raisi’s visit to New York is complicated by efforts to serve a writ on him in a civil action accusing him of torture in a case brought by three former political prisoners including Kylie Moore-Gilbert, the British-Australian academic held in Iran.
No writ can be served on him at the UN headquarters but efforts can be made outside the building.
The case, filed with the south district court of New York, accuses Raisi of overseeing torture and maltreatment of three prisoners.
The three plaintiffs are Moore-Gilbert, Mehdi Hajati, a former Shiraz city councillor, and the Belgian-Iranian academic and former hostage Hamid Babaei.
In a message to a press conference in New York, Moore-Gilbert said she had spent two years and three months deprived of her liberty entirely unjustly on no factual basis.
During her detention, she said, she “had suffered physical and psychological torture that remains with me to this day … in total, I spent 12 months in solitary confinement. I was routinely subjected to cruel, degrading and humiliating treatment.”
Moore-Gilbert said she frequently wrote to Raisi, as head of the judiciary, outlining the denial of her basic human rights but never received a reply.
Three people killed in Iran protests over death of Mahsa Amini
Kurdistan governor blames deaths on ‘plot by the enemy’ on fourth day of protests over 22-year-old’s death in custody
Iranian government officials have denounced a fourth day of protests after the death of a 22-year-old Kurdish woman in police custody, claiming the demonstrators have fallen victim to a conspiracy by its enemies.
Mahsa Amini died on Friday after she was arrested by the morality police for not wearing the hijab and her trousers correctly, a tragic episode that has unleashed fury in the streets against the unaccountable and sometimes brutal treatment handed out to women by this branch of the police.
Women and men took to the streets in cities and towns across the country for the fourth evening in a row Tuesday, despite the deaths of at least three people in the protests on Monday, shouting slogans against Iran’s clerical leadership, images posted on social media showed.
Local petitions have been started calling for the disbandment of the morality police, saying their actions enforcing the hijab are counterproductive and discriminatory.
Earlier on Tuesday, Mohsen Mansouri, the governor of Tehran, tweeted: “The main elements of the initial core of the gatherings in Tehran tonight were fully organised, trained and planned to create disturbances in Tehran.
“Burning the flag, pouring diesel on the roads, throwing stones, attacking the police, setting fire to the engine and garbage cans, destroying public property, etc … are not the work of ordinary people.”
Some Iranian lawmakers claimed outsiders, including news organisations backed by Iran’s enemies in Saudi Arabia, were exploiting her death. They nevertheless continued to promise an inquiry.
The scale of the violence and the number of arrests on Monday night are hard to assess independently. However, videos of beatings and protests were posted on social media, including footage with the sound of gunfire.
The Kurdish human rights group Hengaw, which is based in Norway, said it had confirmed three deaths at rallies in Kurdistan province – one in each of the towns of Divandareh, Saqqez and Dehglan.
It added that 221 people had been wounded and another 250 arrested in the Kurdistan region, where there had also been a general strike on Monday.
A 10-year-old girl – blood-spattered images of whom have gone viral on social media – was wounded in the town of Bukan but was alive, it added.
On Tuesday, the governor of Iran’s Kurdistan region, Ismail Zarei Koosha, confirmed three people had been killed but blamed the deaths on “a plot by the enemy”, according to the state-affiliated Fars news agency
“One of the citizens of the city of Divandarreh was killed with a type of military weapon that none of the ranks of the armed forces use,” he was quoted as saying.
Many protests were peaceful, including the placing of a banner depicting Amini on a bridge across one of Tehran’s main highways.
The controversy is sensitive for the Iranian president, Ebrahim Raisi, who is currently in New York to address the UN general assembly for the first time. Human rights groups in New York are protesting against his presence and launching legal actions against him.
Although Raisi has ordered an investigation and expressed his personal sympathy, his critics say his earlier support for a more interventionist morality police has exposed a cultural division inside Iran.
In a sign that authorities were concerned the anger could spiral out of their control, an aide to the country’s supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, paid a two-hour visit to Amini’s family home on Monday.
The semi-official Tasnim news agency said Abdolreza Pourzahabi told Amini’s family “all institutions will take action to defend the rights that were violated” and that he was sure Khamenei was “also affected and pained” by her death.
The controversy has overshadowed talks due on Tuesday between Ali Bagheri, Iran’s chief nuclear negotiator, and the EU chief negotiator, Enrique Mora.
The regime is determined to argue that she died in police custody not due to any beating but as a result of a pre-existing brain condition, and an operation conducted when she was five. CT scans of her brain released by the hospital have become the subject of medical dispute, with government supporters citing neurologists claiming they show the psychological stress was caused by the previous brain operation, and its critics claiming they show signs of a physical beating and trauma. The official government news site said it could take three weeks for the inquiry to reach a conclusion.
Regardless of the outcome, sections of Iranian society have clearly lost patience with the morality police, arguing that many women have suffered long-term post-traumatic stress disorder after the police’s efforts to “re-educate” them.
In Geneva, the UN Human Rights Office said Iran’s morality police had been expanding their patrols in recent months, targeting women for not properly wearing the Islamic headscarf, known as hijab. It said verified videos showed women being slapped in the face, struck with batons and thrown into police vans for wearing the hijab too loosely.
Nada Al-Nashif, the acting UN high commissioner for human rights, said: “Mahsa Amini’s tragic death and allegations of torture and ill-treatment must be promptly, impartially and effectively investigated by an independent competent authority.”
Mahsa Amini’s brutal death may be moment of reckoning for Iran
Signs of groundswell taking shape against state that routinely commits extreme acts of violence against men and women.
Mahsa Amini’s death in custody is fast becoming another moment of reckoning for the Iranian regime that fears a popular revolt more than it fears staring down the rest of the world.
Four days after Amini died in a Tehran hospital, protests in the Iranian capital show little sign of slowing. Most protests appear peaceful, but some in Kurdish areas of Iran have turned violent.
There are some signs that a groundswell could be taking shape: the first of its kind since 2009, when the death of another young woman sparked days of widespread unrest not seen since the Islamic Revolution in 1979.
Even now, Neda Agha Soltan’s slow demise from a gunshot to the chest remains a testament to how Iran deals with dissent, and with women. Soltan was shot by a sniper as she attended an anti-government protest in June 2009, in a moment that galvanized a revolt and, for a time, exposed the fragility of one of the region’s staunchest police states.
Images of Amini being dragged last Thursday into a van by morality police – reportedly for a perceived breach of the hijab head-covering rules – have stirred memories of Soltan’s death, and once again raised the spectre of a state that routinely commits extreme acts of violence against women and men who defy it.
The decade plus between both events has been an era of increasing oppression in Iran, where activists have been confined to the shadows and the state itself has crushed all trace of the Green Revolution that followed the disputed 2009 presidential elections.
The the state’s henchmen, known as basiji, whose members were responsible for killing Soltan, and the Revolutionary Guards, who enforce the values of the Islamic Revolution, have had the run of the streets, especially since the election of Ebrahim Raisi as president.
A hardliner with deeply conservative views, Raisi has further narrowed the margin for dissent, empowering the morality police and entrenching an inflexible interpretation of Shia Islam across all corners of the country.
Iran’s leaders have so far blamed “conspirators” for Amini’s death even thought it took place in one of the regime’s own cells, and also claimed that riots and protests were the work of foes, such as Saudi Arabia. The playbook is familiar, and so too are platitudes.
At the same time, semi-official state media has flagged an inquiry and claimed that senior officials, such as Iran’s supreme leader, Ali Khamenei, were likely to have felt sympathy for Amini’s death, which had been earlier blamed on a heart condition, or epilepsy, neither of which the 22-year-old Kurd suffered from, according to her parents.
Iran’s hardliners have learned lessons from 2009, when a broad uprising nearly escaped the state’s control. The country now has some of the best and most pervasive digital security in the region and a firm hold over communities it has terrified into silence.
But it also finds itself up against a formidable expatriate network who want different things for the country and its people, and a strong homegrown activist push that knows how to organise. Whether Amini’s death will become another seminal moment in the pursuit of self determination by so many Iranians, or an ember that eventually cools, remains to be seen.
However, Iranian leaders fear a street they can no longer contain. The brutal death of another young woman is the recipe for more unrest. The regime has found itself in tricky waters.
Head of Iran’s morality police reportedly suspended amid protests
Protests enter third day after death in custody of Kurdish woman accused of breaking strict hijab rules
The head of Iran’s morality police has reportedly been suspended from his post as protests swept across Iran for a third day over the killing of a 22-year-old Kurdish woman who was detained by the police after being accused of not wearing the hijab appropriately.
A number of respected Iranian news outlets reported that Col Ahmed Mirzaei, the head of the moral security police of Greater Tehran, had been suspended from his role after the death of Mahsa Amini. Tehran police denied he had been suspended or fired.
A CT scan of Amini’s head showed a bone fracture, haemorrhage, and brain edema, seemingly confirming that she died due to being struck on the head.
The scan results, if confirmed, are a huge setback not only for the morality police, but the wider Tehran police force since it published edited videos of her arrest and detention in a police centre designed to show she died due to a heart condition or epilepsy.
Her father has always denied she suffered any such condition, effectively accusing the police of a cover-up.
President Ebrahim Raisi, who since his election last year has tightened enforcement of the headscarf law, spoke to Amini’s family by phone on Sunday. “Your daughter is like my own daughter, and I feel that this incident happened to one of my loved ones. Please accept my condolences,” state media reported him as saying.
Raisi is travelling to New York where he is due to address the general assembly on Tuesday over the future of the nuclear deal with the west.
Raisi will be hoping that protests will have died down by time he speaks in New York. But disturbances continued after darkness fell on Monday night, amid reports of several deaths in the Kurdish city of Saqez.
Several hundred people marched down a central street in Tehran on Monday night, including women who took off their hijabs, the ISNA news agency reported. Police responded with baton charges and teargas.
The former Iranian foreign minister Javad Zarif said he was ashamed by what happened to Amini.
Speaking at a press conference, the Greater Tehran police commander, Hossein Rahimi, said Amini was stopped by the morality police, known as “Gasht-e Ershad”, while walking in a park because her hijab was “inappropriate”. He claimed the police had not made mistakes and railed against the “cowardly accusations” being made against his force.
“There was no negligence on the part of the police, not even a small slip; all the words published in cyberspace about the cause of death are pure lies.”
Rahimi said “there was no argument or resistance” during Amini’s detention, claiming she was “even joking” while inside the morality police’s van. He admitted “guidance patrol officers are equipped with body cameras, but in this instance, they had no camera”.
In social media posted online, there was footage of police motorcycles in flames, and large crowds gathering to demand a relaxation of hijab rules.
Kurdish rights group Hengaw said on Twitter five people had been killed on Monday when security forces opened fire during protests. The rights group said two people were killed in the Kurdish city of Saqez, Amini’s hometown. Two others were killed in Divandarreh, and a fifth was killed in Dehgolan, Hengaw said.
There was not official confirmation of the deaths. The reports could not be immediately independently verified.
State TV said a number of protesters had been arrested but rejected “some claims of deaths on social media” by showing two injured youths who denied reports they had been killed.
Protesters threw rocks at security forces in the town of Divandarreh in Kurdistan, a video posted on Twitter Hengaw showed. A widely followed Iranian Twitter account that focuses on protests in Iran said shopkeepers had gone on strike in Kurdish cities.
Students rallied, including at the capital’s Tehran and Shahid Beheshti universities, demanding “clarification” on how Mahsa Amini died, and water cannon was seen on the streets in an attempt to quell the protests. Many women joined the protests refusing to wear the hijab.
Stepping up denials of any wrongdoing in the death, police commander Hossein Rahimi said Amini had suffered no physical harm and that police had “done everything” to keep her alive. “This incident was unfortunate for us and we wish to never witness such incidents,” Rahimi said, describing accusations of mistreatment as “cowardly”.
Amini was visiting Tehran with her family on Tuesday last week when she was detained by morality police in what Amnesty International called “an arbitrary arrest”.
Police accused her of not complying with the country’s hijab regulations and took her to a police station, telling her family she would be released after a “re-education” session.
However, she was subsequently transferred in a coma to the emergency department of a nearby hospital. Pictures of her face in hospital showed discolouring around her ears that seemed consistent with physical blows. She died on Friday.
Official police department reports say Amini died after suffering a heart attack, but her family hold police responsible.
Videos shared on Twitter late on Sunday showed protesters demonstrating in Sanandaj, the capital of Kurdistan province. A video posted by Hengaw showed security forces in riot gear running down a street in the city, at least one of them firing what appeared to be a gun.
The US called for accountability in the case. “Mahsa Amini’s death after injuries sustained while in police custody for wearing an ‘improper’ hijab is an appalling and egregious affront to human rights,” a spokesperson for the White House national security council said.
“Women in Iran should have the right to wear what they want, free from violence or harassment. Iran must end its use of violence against women for exercising their fundamental freedoms,” the official said. “There must be accountability for Mahsa’s death.”
The EU’s foreign affairs spokesperson said: “It is imperative that the Iranian authorities ensure the fundamental rights of its citizens are respected and that those who are under any form of detention are not subject to any form of mistreatment.”
