Morocco earthquake: at least 2,000 dead and thousands more injured
Old city in Marrakech among areas hit in quake measuring at least 6.8 that centred on the High Atlas mountains
A powerful earthquake in Morocco’s High Atlas mountains has killed at least 2,000 people, a death toll that is expected to rise as rescuers were struggling on Saturday to reach hard-hit remote areas.
The magnitude-6.8 quake is the biggest to hit the North African country in 120 years.
At least 2,012 people died in the quake, mostly in Marrakech and five provinces near the epicentre, Morocco’s interior ministry said. At least another 2,059 people were injured, 1,404 critically, officials said.
The full toll will almost certainly increase as rescuers have struggled to bypass boulder-strewn roads to the remote mountain villages that were hit hardest.
The World Health Organization (WHO) said more than 300,000 people had been affected by the powerful tremors throughout the country.
Morocco declared three days of national mourning, during which the national flag would be flown at half mast, the royal court said. The Moroccan armed forces were deploying rescue teams to provide affected areas with clean drinking water, food supplies, tents and blankets, it added.
Residents of Marrakech, the major city nearest to the epicentre, said some buildings had collapsed in the old city, a Unesco world heritage site. The city’s famous 12th-century Koutoubia mosque suffered damage, but the extent was not immediately clear.
Initial reports said part of a minaret that towered over Djemaa el-Fna, a market square and hub for visitors, had collapsed, injuring two people, before people fled to the open area of the square to seek shelter.
Local television showed piles of rubble and broken pipes crushing parked cars and blocking streets across Marrakech, as residents rushed into the street after the quake struck at 11.11pm on Friday. State TV showed people wrapped in blankets sleeping in the street, fearing further aftershocks.
“The problem is that where destructive earthquakes are rare, buildings are simply not constructed robustly enough to cope with strong ground shaking, so many collapse, resulting in high casualties,” said Bill McGuire, professor emeritus of geophysical and climate hazards at University College London.
“I was returning home when the earthquake struck. My car rocked back and forth, but I didn’t imagine for a single second this meant there was an earthquake happening,” said Fayssal Badour, from Marrakech, who spoke to France24.
“I stopped and I realised the catastrophe … it felt like we were on a river that suddenly burst its banks. The cries and the shouts were unbearable.”
A local official said most of the deaths had occurred in mountainous areas that were hard to reach.
Morocco’s interior minister attempted to reassure the public in a communique that “state authorities continue to mobilise all necessary human and logistical resources, to deploy specialised first responder units including search and rescue teams”.
Separately, the Moroccan military announced that the king, Mohammed VI, had authorised the country’s armed forces to intervene and oversee aid efforts.
“Rapid response units, aeroplanes, helicopters, drones, engineering and logistical centres have been deployed to the location, with the aim of bringing the necessary support to affected areas and homes,” it said.
“The earth shook for about 20 seconds. Doors opened and shut by themselves as I rushed downstairs from the second floor,” said Hamid Afkir, a teacher in a mountainous area west of the epicentre near Taroudant, adding that there had been aftershocks.
Morocco’s geophysical centre said the quake struck in the Ighil area with a magnitude of 7.2. The US Geological Survey put the quake’s magnitude at 6.8 and said it was at a relatively shallow depth of 11.5 miles.
Philippe Vernant – a specialist in active tectonics, particularly in Morocco, at the University of Montpellier – told Agence France-Presse that even though the quake did not hit in the most active seismological region, aftershocks could be expected. “Even if they are less strong, they can lead to the collapse of buildings already weakened by the earthquake. Traditionally, we tend to say that aftershocks diminish in intensity.”
In Marrakech, some houses in the tightly packed old city had collapsed and people were removing debris by hand while they waited for heavy equipment, resident Id Waaziz Hassan said.
Footage of the medieval city wall showed big cracks in one section and parts that had fallen, with rubble on the street.
Another Marrakech resident, Brahim Himmi, said he saw ambulances coming out of the old town and many building facades damaged. People were frightened and were staying outside in case of another quake, he said.
People in Rabat, about 220 miles north of Ighil, and in the coastal town of Imsouane, about 100 miles to its west, also fled their homes, fearing a stronger quake, according to witnesses.
“We heard screams at the time of the tremor,” a resident of Essaouira, 124 miles west of Marrakech, said by phone. “People are in the squares, in the cafes, preferring to sleep outside. Pieces of facades have fallen.”
Some videos shared on social media appeared to show at least one building collapsing and rubble in the streets. Others showed people running out of a shopping centre, restaurants and apartment buildings and congregating outside.
The US Geological Survey said the region’s population lived in “structures that are highly vulnerable to earthquake shaking”.
Internet connectivity was disrupted in Marrakech due to power cuts in the region, according to the global internet monitor NetBlocks.
Morocco has suffered earthquakes in its northern region due to its position between the African and Eurasian tectonic plates. The country experienced a major tremor of 6.3 magnitude in the town of Al Hoceima on its northern coast in 2004, which killed more than 600 people.
The quake was felt in neighbouring Algeria and as far away as Portugal, according to the Portuguese Institute for Sea and Atmosphere and Algeria’s Civil Defence agency, which oversees emergency responses.
Leaders and diplomats around the world expressed condolences and offered their support, including Turkey, where powerful earthquakes in February killed more than 50,000 people.
The prime minister of Morocco’s cross-strait neighbour Spain, Pedro Sanchez, expressed his “solidarity and support to the people of Morocco in the wake of this terrible earthquake … Spain is with the victims of this tragedy”.
The French president, Emmanuel Macron, said he was “devastated” and that “France stands ready to help with first aid”.
Algerian state television broadcast a message from the presidency, declaring that the state would open its airspace to allow the transport of humanitarian aid to Morocco as well as offering aid resources, a shift following a complete rupture in diplomatic relations between the two nations that has lasted for two years.
A map showing the location of the Moroccan quake. Photograph: US Geological Survey/EPA
In 1980, the 7.3-magnitude El Asnam earthquake in neighbouring Algeria killed 2,500 people and left at least 300,000 homeless. An earthquake of magnitude 5.8 shook the coastal town of Agadir in 1960, leaving more than 15,000 people dead.
Morocco earthquake: everything known so far
More than 800 people killed, with most fatalities in hard-to-reach mountainous areas
More than 800 people have been killed in Morocco after a powerful earthquake hit several towns and cities. The search for survivors is ongoing.
Morocco’s interior ministry said on Saturday morning that at least 820 people had died, and another 672 people were injured.
A local official said most deaths were in mountainous areas that were hard to reach.
The earthquake is Morocco’s deadliest since at least 2004, when a tremor in the northern Rif mountains killed more than 600 people.
More than 300 people have been reported injured in the quake, which local officials say caused the most damage in rural areas.
The earthquake, which was centred in Ighil, measured at least 6.8 magnitude, though some readings have it higher.
In Marrakech, some buildings in the old city, a Unesco world heritage site, have been damaged or destroyed.
Numerous world leaders, including Emmanuel Macron, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, Narendra Modi and Olaf Scholz, have sent messages of support.
The UK foreign secretary, James Cleverly, has said the UK is supporting British nationals after the quake.
Friday’s quake was felt as far away as Portugal and Algeria, according to the Portuguese Institute for Sea and Atmosphere and Algeria’s Civil Defence agency, which oversees emergency response.
In 1960, a magnitude 5.8 tremor struck near the Moroccan city of Agadir and caused thousands of deaths.
‘The streets were jammed’: fear and confusion after Morocco earthquake
Witnesses describe how panic spread across the country when powerful earthquake struck
Amid shock and devastation that jolted people in towns and cities for miles around the epicentre of a powerful earthquake in Morocco, people across the country described paralysing fear of further aftershocks and widespread confusion.
“For the first few seconds, you don’t know what’s happening. My wife called out to me and obviously we both jumped for our daughter. My wife picked up the baby and we ran outside but we weren’t sure what we were meant to do,” said Bode Shonibare, a British-Nigerian banker visiting his wife’s family in a northern district of Marrakech, the major city closest to the epicentre.
The earthquake struck shortly after 11pm local time, sending stone buildings and pieces of a towering minaret tumbling in central Marrakech and causing widespread panic far from the rural town of Ighil in the Al Haouz province, 44 miles south of Marrakech.
Once Shonibare, his wife and their daughter, who is just a few weeks old, reached the street, he described a scene of “absolute chaos”.
“Everyone ran outside, people were in shock, crying as they held their babies in their hands. The streets were jammed with people. Everyone was terrified to go back into their houses as they just didn’t know if that was the end or if it might continue,” he said.
“We stood outside for another hour or two trying to figure out what had happened. There were fire trucks and ambulances zooming past us, it was all so chaotic. Then after 40 minutes everyone just sat on the pavement in the street just kind of waiting. We didn’t know what was happening.”
Images showed widespread destruction across Marrakech, a Unesco world heritage site where newer apartment complexes on the edge of the sprawling city border a network of alleyways shaded by historic and ornate buildings.
The earthquake, its magnitude estimated at 6.8, sent stone slabs tumbling to the ground, creating piles of rubble in the streets as terrified people fled and spent the night on the pavement and in squares, afraid to return to their homes.
As Saturday dawned, Shonibare described how people rushed to check on their neighbours amid confusion and fear about whether to remain outdoors or shelter from potential aftershocks and the soaring early September temperatures.
“There have been reports of aftershocks, and everyone is still on high alert,” he said. “No one really knows what to do. On one hand it feels like we should be inside, but on the other, maybe we should go back out and sit in the park.
“It’s hard to get a sense of how things are being managed. So far we’ve been seeing police vans, ambulances and fire trucks going to the centre. It seems they’re doing the best they can, but I don’t know if anyone fully knows the extent of the damage – that’s the main problem.
“But people have really been checking in on their neighbours. The community is really trying to do what it can to take care of one another.”
Sociologist Amro Ali, who lives in the northern port city of Casablanca, almost 270 miles from Ighil, described how the force of the quake jolted his home. “My wife identified what was happening. As she has a little more experience with earthquakes, she ran and hid under the table, so I did the same. I also went to shut off the gas. Of course, it was frightening. The one reassuring part was that nothing was falling, but still it was completely disorienting,” he said.
“Then we opened the front doors and everyone was running out trying to evacuate, people were shouting and screaming. Everything was mayhem, people ran out in whatever clothes they were wearing and went down to the street. Then they began to talk about aftershocks.”
By the following day, Ali described a sense of eerie calm amid growing concern for the situation in remote villages. “These are the ones likely to be worst affected because of the lower-quality construction materials used and also the slow response of the emergency services to make it to these rugged areas,” he said.
In the capital, Rabat, more than 315 miles from the epicentre, development worker Loubna Rais described how she believed she was about to die in her home, and was still processing the shock of the sudden and violent tremors well into the next day.
Please share your story if you are 18 or over, anonymously if you wish. For more information please see our terms of service and privacy policy.
As soon as the tremors ended, Rais was fearful about the destruction closer to the epicentre, which is in a remote area within the Atlas mountain range.
“The majority of the people who are going to be hit the hardest are those in the mountain areas, in rural areas, people who already have very little, those who do not have access to basic services.
“I’m hoping that everything will be done to help those who need it; the first 48 hours are crucial. We can still save people. But it’s just devastating. It’s heart-wrenching to think that there are all these people out there looking for their loved ones with very little to work with.”
Rais was up late working from bed in her fourth-floor apartment when she felt her apartment begin to shake.
“I just kept waiting for it to stop and it didn’t stop, I was very scared,” she said. “Quite frankly, that’s when I realised we are not educated about these dangers and what to do when this happens. I gathered my cats and we hid under this huge wooden desk that my dad had made me when I was a teenager. Because that was my only source of hope at that moment. It was scary. I started hearing people screaming outside.
“People were looking to see which other buildings could collapse, basically. I only had a little charge on my phone, I couldn’t reach my parents, my family, my friends, I just started panicking. It passed – but then we started reading about how bad it was in other parts of the country.”
Morocco experienced an earthquake of magnitude 5.8 in the coastal city of Agadir in 1960, which killed a third of the city’s population, an estimated 15,000 people. In 2004, a 6.3-magnitude earthquake struck the town of Al Hoceima on Morocco’s northern coastline, killing more than 600 people and making thousands homeless.
Despite the unexpected force of Saturday’s earthquake, many began to ask whether Morocco’s proximity to fault lines and history of earthquakes meant the state could have done more to prepare residents for a disaster of this scale, especially in remote villages.
“Right after the end of the first set of tremors, there’s an immediate sense of relief that nothing was destroyed near you. But then immediately, you think of others, those in secluded areas, in poor conditions. I started looking for information, but there was none, which added a little to the anxiety of it all. I turned to social media, and that’s where I found all the videos, the calls for help and for blood donations,” said Rais.
The death toll climbed rapidly, amid mounting concern about how rescue workers might reach remote communities in the Atlas mountains.
“This is devastating,” said Rais. “People are calling for help, they are desperate, they are asking the authorities to send proper assistance, ambulances, rescuers. People are trying to pull their own children from under the rubble. You can already see that it was those who have the least, those most marginalised, those most isolated, that suffered the most in this tragedy.”
Morocco leads earthquake rescue with many nations offering support
Rabat has yet to issue appeal for international aid despite powerful quake killing more than 2,000 people
Several countries have offered aid and search support after the Moroccan earthquake, but most of the rescue operation in remote mountain areas was being led by local teams and Rabat has not yet issued a broad demand for international aid.
After a powerful earthquake late on Friday night killed more than 2,000 people, Moroccan authorities this weekend made bilateral contact with certain countries whom they authorised to send expert search and rescue teams. These included Tunisia, who sent 50 paramedics and personnel from a specialised unit, as well as search dogs, advanced thermal monitoring devices, a drone to detect victims under the rubble and a field hospital. Qatar also sent a rescue team and medical crews.
Spain’s foreign minister, José Manuel Albares, said on Sunday Madrid would also send search and rescue teams and aid, after a formal request for help from Morocco.
“It is a sign of Spanish solidarity and of the sense of friendship that unites the people of Spain with the people of Morocco,” Albares told Catalunya Radio, after receiving a call from his Moroccan counterpart. A Spanish military search and rescue team of 56 soldiers and four dogs was flown to Marrakech.
Neighbouring Algeria, which has had difficult relations with Morocco, opened its airspace, which had been closed for two years, to flights carrying humanitarian aid and the injured.
Other countries said specialist search and rescue teams were ready if Morocco called on them, including Turkey, the US and Taiwan.
French authorities said they were ready to help Morocco but would wait for a formal request for assistance.
“France is ready to offer its aid to Morocco if Morocco decides it is useful,” President Emmanuel Macron said on Sunday during a news conference at the G20 summit in New Delhi.
“Moroccan authorities know exactly what can be delivered, the nature [of what can be delivered] and the timing ... We are at their disposal. We did everything we could do ... The second they request this aid, it will be deployed,” he said.
The French foreign ministry spokesperson Anne-Claire Legendre told French TV: “Our embassy in Morocco is fully mobilised…. Today, Moroccan authorities are in charge ... An assessment [of the situation] is under way.”
Sylvie Brunel, a geography professor who has worked for the NGO Action Against Hunger, told Le Figaro: “As an emerging country, which sees itself as an interlocutor with Europe and who aspires to a status of regional power in Africa, Rabat wants to show it is sovereign, capable of piloting its own search and rescue, and not behave as if it is a poor wounded country that the whole world wants to charitably save.”
She said that due to the remote mountain areas affected by the earthquake, the key emergency rescue work would depend on local Moroccan teams in the first 48 hours.
In France, where there are large numbers of dual French-Moroccan citizens, as well as many Moroccan students and residents, several regional authorities announced they would make humanitarian aid available and, at a later point, aid for rebuilding.
Regional leaders in Occitanie, Corsica and Provence-Alpes-Côte d’Azur, in the south of France, said in a joint statement that they would make €1m (£860,000) available. They said their regions “had strong Mediterranean links” and offered their support.
Morocco earthquake: mourning begins as rescue continues with death toll over 2,000
Rescuers in Morocco were trying to find survivors in the rubble of collapsed buildings on Sunday as the country began three days of mourning for victims of a disaster that killed more than 2,000 people and left many more injured and homeless.
Friday’s 6.8-magnitude quake, Morocco’s deadliest in more than six decades, had an epicentre below a remote cluster of mountainous villages 45 miles south of Marrakech, and shook infrastructure as far away as the country’s northern coast.
The government reported that at least 2,122 people were killed and more than 2,421 injured, many of them critically. In Marrakech, many people slept outside on pavements and in squares, fearing returning to their homes.
Military forces and emergency services rushed to reach remote villages where many more victims were feared trapped.
Morocco’s King Mohammed VI chaired an emergency disaster response meeting on Saturday afternoon and declared three days of national mourning. Civil protection units were deployed to increase stocks in blood banks and ensure the supply of resources including water, food, tents and blankets to affected areas, the palace said.
Omar Bajjou, from a village near Asni at the foot of the Atlas mountains, 30 miles south of Marrakech, said the force of the earthquake threw him out of bed, terrifying him and his wife.
“I initially thought it was an airplane that had somehow fallen on the roof of our building,” he said. Fleeing outside, they found chaos in their village. “All of the surrounding houses, especially the mud-brick ones, had crumbled, and the others had huge cracks in them, fatal cracks, like they could collapse at any moment. There was dust everywhere, and the sound of screams,” he said.
Bajjou and the other villagers began to try to dig their neighbours out from under their homes. “We managed to rescue several people who were buried under the rubble, we saved some but others were already dead, like my neighbour. Another lost both of their children, and his wife was injured. In total, there were five dead from our building.”
Terrified and cold, the residents of the village remained outside for two days without water or electricity, too scared to return to their homes for fear of further aftershocks or crumbling buildings.
Samia Errazzouki, an expert in the history and governance of the Moroccan state at Stanford University in California, said: “Roads and access to this region are already difficult, before you compound that with difficulties like rubble or problems with the roads. It’s going to take a miracle to get immediate aid there.”
Members of Morocco’s marginalised Amazigh community, sometimes known as Berbers, live among the villages in the earthquake zone. “These regions have historically been hit with earthquakes, but they have also been marginalised,” Errazzouki said.
Several countries including Israel, France, Spain, Italy and the US have offered aid. Neighbouring Algeria, which has had difficult relations with Morocco, opened its airspace, which had been closed for two years, to flights carrying humanitarian aid and the injured.
Al-Haouz province, above the epicentre of the earthquake, recorded the most deaths, 1,293, followed by the province of Taroudant with 452.
Kamal, who declined to give his surname, from the town of Skoura, an oasis west of Marrakech at the base of the Atlas, said homes across the town had sustained damage but villages higher up in the hills had fared even worse.
“We felt the violent tremors but everyone managed to get out of their houses in time. Thankfully we are yet to count any deaths, but many of the clay homes here completely collapsed. However, the villages further up in the mountains have been seriously affected – there are many dead and we are completely unable to reach them,” he said.
People across the country described their terror at being unable to contact their loved ones in villages across the earthquake zone, where telephone networks have been patchy and in some cases continue to be unable to function after the earthquake.
“I wasn’t at home at the time, I was in Casablanca but even there we still felt the violent shaking and stayed outside the entire night,” said Toufik, also from Skoura. “I managed to contact my family by phone that night, but for a period after that it became impossible, the network wasn’t functioning. I began to panic as I didn’t know what had happened to them, whether there had been further aftershocks that had affected them. Thankfully after several hours I managed to speak to them and everyone was OK.”
While the country mourned, some questioned the speed of the emergency response. The king has long been quietly accused of governing from his residence in France. Despite him returning to chair the emergency response meeting, some said vital hours may have been lost due to a need for the palace’s approval and control.
“Ultimately, nothing in the country gets done with the green light from the palace … so much time was lost because [the king] was physically not there,” said Errazzouki, the Stanford academic. “Fundamentally, this is a reflection of how ineffective Moroccan governance has been due to the fact it relies entirely on an authoritarian structure of a figure who is absent.”
She added: “There’s a cloud of opacity surrounding communications, and this becomes an impediment to the state being able to effectively carry out emergency operations … every second counts in these moments, every minute it takes to get approval, to double-check all these tedious time-consuming steps – people are dying. Lives could have been saved.”
Residents of Marrakech, the biggest city nearest to the epicentre, said some buildings had collapsed in the old city, a Unesco world heritage site. Video showed the city’s famous 12th-century Koutoubia mosque, which stands over the central Djemaa el-Fna marketplace, quaking with the force of the initial tremors, as people fled into the open area to seek safety.
The Red Cross said repairing the damage wrought by the powerful earthquake could take years. Unesco pledged to help repair damage to heritage in historic Marrakech, but the prospect of rebuilding in inaccessible remote towns and villages appeared even more challenging.
“It won’t be a matter of a week or two … We are counting on a response that will take months, if not years,” said the Red Cross Middle East and north Africa director, Hossam Elsharkawi.
Philippe Vernant, a specialist in active tectonics, particularly in Morocco, at the University of Montpellier, told Agence France-Presse that even though the quake did not hit in Morocco’s most active seismological region, aftershocks could be expected. “Even if they are less strong, they can lead to the collapse of buildings already weakened by the earthquake. Traditionally, we tend to say that aftershocks diminish in intensity,” he said.
The prime minister of Morocco’s cross-strait neighbour Spain, Pedro Sánchez, expressed his “solidarity and support to the people of Morocco in the wake of this terrible earthquake … Spain is with the victims of this tragedy,” he said.
The French president, Emmanuel Macron, said he was “devastated” and that “France stands ready to help with first aid”.
Algerian state television broadcast a message from the presidency, declaring that the state would open its airspace to allow the transport of humanitarian aid to Morocco as well as offering aid resources, a significant shift after the rupture in diplomatic relations between the two nations that has lasted for two years.
Morocco has regularly experienced earthquakes along its northern coastline, notably a 6.3-magnitude quake near the town of Al Hoceima in 2004, which killed more than 600 people. Friday’s earthquake was one of the more destructive since the 1960 quake that destroyed Agadir and killed 15,000 people, a third of the city’s population at that time.
Errazzouki said: “Obviously we can’t prevent earthquakes, and loss of life is unfortunately inevitable with something of this magnitude. But what can be controlled is how we respond to it and how we deal with it. It takes a crisis, a disaster like this to shed light on the day-to-day realities of people who live in the margins.”
‘My neighbours dug for me with bare hands’: Morocco earthquake survivors grapple with loss and chaos all around
Help has yet to arrive in the village of Moulay Brahim in the Atlas mountains where homes have been reduced to rubble
In a narrow passage in the village of Moulay Brahim, in Morocco’s Atlas mountains, a house had spilled across the lane in a drift of sandy ruins. It was largely unrecognisable from what it once was, save for the unlikely survival of a solitary room left beached atop the rubble, the blue paint of its walls still visible.
Abderahim Imni, with his hand bandaged from where he was injured by falling masonry during Friday’s devastating earthquake, was directing the cleanup in the street where his home once stood.
An electrician aged 43, he had been sleeping in the surviving part of his house along with three other family members when the rest of the building collapsed around them as a series of devastating shocks struck the village at just after 11pm. It was, he conceded, a lucky escape.
“I felt the house shaking. We were covered in debris for a moment but it was only for a short time and then we managed to escape,” he said. “Even then it wasn’t easy. There was no electricity and the air was full of dust. You couldn’t see. My heart was pounding like I was having a heart attack.”
In the choking gloom, Abderahim and his family members had clambered down a drop on to the talus of teetering rubble and fled to a nearby garden where they spent the night.
The family and their neighbours in this village of 3,000 were still coming to terms with the death and destruction that was visited on them so suddenly.
In the heart of this poor rural village, which sprawls down a steep mountain slope, there was almost no building left unscathed. Some houses, like Abderahim’s, had disintegrated. Others had been left standing but with upper storeys now bowing dangerously over the narrow stepped lanes, threatening to tumble under their own weight.
But the worst impact has been on human lives. Moulay Brahim’s residents say 25 people died here that they know of, among more than 2,100 known so far to have died across the quake zone.
In the immediate aftermath of the disaster, villagers dug the living and the dead out of the ruins with the most rudimentary of tools, giving first aid to the survivors until ambulances could reach the village. Landslides blocking the roads had to be cleared first.
“I was asleep when the earthquake struck,” said Fatna Bechar. “I could not escape because the roof fell on me. I was trapped. I was saved by my neighbours who cleared the rubble with their bare hands. Now, I am living with them in their house because mine was completely destroyed.”
On a main road at the upper end of the village, coffins bearing a mother and her daughter, two of four family members killed when their house collapsed, were being put into an ambulance on Sunday morning to be taken to a nearby hospital.
As the bodies were being loaded, a group of weeping relatives surrounded the vehicle crying out the names of the dead.
Standing nearby, Oumizane Lahoucine, 56, described the moment the earth shook and he ran to shelter in the street. “It lasted for six seconds,” he recalled, in a suit jacket and trousers smudged with dust. “It felt like we were being bombed.”
Behind his blue painted door, the stairs to the upper floor were choked with fallen masonry. The walls of every room were cracked. One side of his house had been pushed into the road outside.
While a food distribution and an international rescue team did reach the village on Sunday, Morocco’s military, whose helicopters could be seen from the village flying over the mountains, had yet to arrive, tasked for now with assisting more remote and even more badly damaged villages still inaccessible by road.
So the villagers of Moulay Brahim were largely helping themselves, digging their streets out from under the ruins, as figures emerged from doors carrying bundles of bedding and clothing to where they were sleeping in the open, shivering through the cool mountain nights.
While the scenes on the road to Moulay Brahim appeared to offer a picture of random destruction, some towns left almost unscathed while other villages were hit hard, there was a grim logic that explained why some buildings fell and others remain standing.
The 6.8-magnitude quake, which shook cities from Marrakech down to the coast, damaged most older houses made of clay brick and cinder blocks in poorer, rural communities, with newer concrete buildings surviving better.
For those who survived the initial quake, the pressing question now is when meaningful help will reach them and what it will involve. For while encampments of tents have begun appearing in some neighbouring locations and alongside the main road closer to the coastal plain, shelters had yet to reach Moulay Brahim on Sunday.
Among those who had been sleeping in the open was Moulay Ali Azouad, sitting with his family by the side of one of the village’s main roads. They had brought out mattresses and blankets from their damaged homes in the immediate aftermath of the catastrophe, but they said they were scared to go back to fetch more and warmer clothes.
“The earthquake happened at about five past 11,” said Moulay Ali. “The ground began to shake. It was a small tremor at first and then 10 more shocks came really fast. We all ran straight from the house and have stayed outside ever since.”
He pointed to a stony layby on the far side of the road. “The women sleep there, and the men sleep here on the pavement,” he said. “The only help we have had so far is from Moroccan relatives living abroad who have sent money for food. But we need clothes and bedding and shelter because it is cold here at night.”
Only now are villagers beginning to ask about the future and who will rebuild their ruined village.
“We’re waiting for the government to bring us the help we need and tell us what will happen,” said Abderahim Imni as he supervised a boulder being shifted from his lane.
Until then, the villagers of Moulay Brahim will continue waiting.
Morocco earthquake: France ‘ready to help’ despite frosty diplomatic relations
France offers €5m to assist disaster relief efforts amid political rift between Rabat and Paris
France’s foreign minister has said it is up to Morocco whether to seek French aid in dealing with its deadliest earthquake in more than six decades, and France is ready to help if asked.
Catherine Colonna said France had pledged €5m (£4.3m) to aid organisations in the north African country, where at least 2,500 people are believed to have died and a further 2,400 have been injured, but it was for Morocco to decide who it officially asked for assistance.
Diplomatic relations between Paris and Rabat have been glacial for years and Morocco’s decision to accept help from just four countries – the UK, Spain, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates – is seen as indicative of not just a political rift but personal rancour between President Emmanuel Macron and King Mohammed VI.
Colonna told BFM TV: “This is an inappropriate controversy … people are suffering, people need help. We are ready to help Morocco. It is a sovereign decision and Morocco alone is entitled to determine what its needs are.”
The €5m aid will go to NGOs already active in the disaster zone.
Since the magnitude 7 earthquake struck overnight on Friday to Saturday, Macron has indicated several times France’s willingness to send aid to Morocco. There has been no official response.
Morocco has previously accused Macron of prioritising good relations with Algeria over those with Rabat.
Middle Eastern analysts have claimed Macron is “obsessed” with improving ties with Algeria, its former colony, and is prepared to sacrifice good relations with Morocco to that end.
A particular subject of contention is what Rabat deems France’s lack of support for its sovereignty claim over the western Sahara, a national cause in Morocco. Algeria supports the Polisario Front, a group seeking independence for the desert area.
In 2017, Macron broke with tradition by making Morocco, a former French protectorate, and not Algeria his first north African state visit as president. But relations have cooled since.
In 2021, a so-called visas war erupted after France said it would restrict visas for Moroccans, Algerians and Tunisians unless the countries agreed to take back migrants, viewed as a deliberate humiliation.
The same year, Paris accused Rabat of trying to spy on Macron via his mobile phone after the number was discovered in Pegasus project data, an accusation the king rejected.
Relations deteriorated further this year when Rabat accused France of being behind a European parliament vote condemning the threat to press freedom in Morocco. Both countries have withdrawn their ambassadors.
In March, after Macron said his relationship with the king was “friendly”, Rabat responded that relations were “neither friendly nor good between the two governments or the royal palace and the Élysée”.
Volunteers from Nice, Lyon and Saint-Etienne flew to Morocco this weekend, but on Sunday the head of a French rescue charity said Moroccan authorities were preventing its teams, which were ready to provide emergency aid, from entering the country.
Arnaud Fraisse, the head of Secouristes sans Frontières, told the broadcaster France Inter that aid workers had hoped to get on a flight to Morocco on Sunday. “Unfortunately, we still don’t have the go-ahead from the Moroccan government,” he said.
France has more than 51,000 people living in Morocco, foreign ministry figures show. According to the Observatory for Immigration and Demographics, France has a Moroccan diaspora of about 1.5 million people, including 670,000 dual nationals.
The French interior minister, Gérald Darmanin, told France 2 on Monday that Morocco was a “brotherly” country and had the capability to cope alone with the rescue efforts.
A magnitude 6.8 quake struck on Friday night killing at least 2,000 people
A powerful earthquake in Morocco has hit several towns and cities, killing at least 2,000 people and leaving scores of others homeless. The search for survivors is ongoing.
When and where did the earthquake happen?
The magnitude 6.8 quake struck shortly after 11pm local time on Friday, collapsing stone buildings and jolting people from their beds across a wide area. The epicentre was near the rural town of Ighil, in the Al Haouz province, 44 miles (70km) south of Marrakech.
Some remote villages in Al Haouz province, known for its scenic villages and valleys tucked in the High Atlas mountains, were almost entirely destroyed.
The quake also caused major damage to the historically significant, 12th-century Tinmel Mosque in a remote mountain area closer to the epicentre.
The tremor was felt in Morocco’s coastal cities of Rabat, Casablanca, Agadir and Essaouira, and as far away as Portugal and Algeria.
How many people have been killed?
On the state news agency reported that the death toll had climbed to 2,497, with 2,476 people injured.
The death toll is expected to rise as rescuers struggle to reach hard-hit remote areas within the Atlas mountains.
The World Health Organization said more than 300,000 people had been affected by the disaster.
How far did the damage spread?
The quake’s epicentre was south-west of Marrakech, a city beloved of Moroccans and foreign tourists for its medieval mosques, palaces and alleyways. Marrakech’s old quarter suffered extensive damage.
Many mountainous villages and towns suffered building collapses and devastating damage. The village of Tafeghaghte, 37 miles south-west of Marrakech, was almost entirely destroyed, with the quake’s epicentre about 30 miles away.
What is the international rescue response?
Algeria, which has had rocky relations with Morocco, opened its airspace – which had been closed for two years – to flights carrying humanitarian aid and the injured.
Morocco has accepted search and rescue-focused international aid from Spain, Qatar, Britain and the United Arab Emirates, bypassing offers from France and the US. Relations between France and Morocco are strained, notably because of French president Emmanuel Macron’s efforts to forge closer ties with Algeria.
Many teams of international rescuers were registered with the UN ready to deploy, but were awaiting a green light from Moroccan authorities, according to the founder of the aid group Rescuers Without Borders.
Are earthquakes common in the area?
While high-magnitude earthquakes are rare, the Atlas mountains are a site of heavy tectonic plate activity.
In 1960, an earthquake hit Agadir and killed 15,000 people, a third of the city’s population. In 1980, the 7.3-magnitude El Asnam earthquake in neighbouring Algeria killed 2,500 and left at least 300,000 homeless. A 6.5-magnitude earthquake struck the northern port city of Al Hoceima in 2004, killing more than 500 people.
Morocco earthquake: death toll passes 2,800 as foreign aid teams fly in
Authorities accept help from some countries but other offers not yet taken up as search for survivors runs out of time
The death toll in the Moroccan earthquake has passed 2,800 people as a limited number of foreign aid and rescue teams joined an intensifying race against time to find any remaining survivors high in the Atlas mountains, where many villages remain inaccessible.
Moroccan authorities said they had “responded favourably” to offers of help from visiting search and rescue teams from Spain, Qatar, Britain and the United Arab Emirates, but they were yet to accept further offers of aid from other countries despite the urgent nature of the disaster – including from France and from Turkey, which experienced a deadly earthquake in February. Its president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, said it would help “with all means” if its offer was accepted.
The state news agency said: “Moroccan authorities have carried out a precise assessment of needs on the ground, given the fact that non-coordination in such situations could be counterproductive.”
Morocco’s King Mohammed VI thanked countries for their offers of help.
Friday’s 6.8-magnitude quake, Morocco’s deadliest in more than six decades, struck in an isolated cluster of mountainous villages 45 miles south of Marrakech, and shook infrastructure as far away as the country’s northern coast.
State TV reported the death toll had risen to 2,862 with 2,562 people injured, and there were expectations that the toll could rise as rescue teams reach remote villages high in the mountains. Drone footage from local television channels showed traditional mud-brick houses completely flattened.
“Until now, we have found no survivors, only the dead buried under the rubble … the smell of corpses is very, very strong. We still have no electricity and no water,” said Aziz, a villager from Ijoukak, near the quake’s epicentre. He said aid and emergency workers had finally arrived in the village, days after the earthquake.
Hamlets in the hills around Ijoukak remained inaccessible. “Even the mules and the donkeys couldn’t get up there as there are huge boulders blocking the roads,” Aziz said.
Driving high into the mountains, the Guardian witnessed a string of flattened villages and hamlets with little sign of help. In places the dirt roads showed signs of fracture from the quake.
In Tafegheghte, once home to about 400 people, villagers said 90 had died. Everyone encountered had a story of losing family members, some almost all of their family. One farmer survived only because he made it to the door more quickly than his wife and other relatives, who perished in the rubble. Another man said he was the only survivor from his family.
In the hamlet of Tarouiste it was a similar story. Of the 12 houses that were once there, not a single one was left standing. Even ambulances had not reached it yet. The dead bodies of six people were dug out by neighbours and carried down the mountain to where cars could take them to hospital.
Footage shared by the Moroccan government on social media showed soldiers digging frantically among towering piles of rubble and using dogs in the faint hope of finding any remaining survivors, as bodies shrouded in blankets were lined up nearby.
Many feared that the combined difficulties of accessing remote mountain villages as well as a delayed emergency response heavily reliant on approval from the royal palace were impeding rescue efforts. Local television channels showed images of military helicopters flying over mountainous areas close to the epicentre, hurling aid from the craft.
Civilian rescuers described rushing to reach remote villages while many across the peaks of the Atlas mountains remained inaccessible. Villagers from across the remote Al Haouz region said they had dug at the rubble with their bare hands to free their trapped neighbours, sometimes too late.
“The villagers helped dig through the rubble and search for survivors,” said Mustapha Abbou, a volunteer aid worker from the region who was in the village of Azgour.
“Right now, the areas that remain hardest to reach are the rural communities of Ijoukak, Ighil and Aghbar, close to the epicentre of the earthquake. Some aid has reached the town of Ijoukak, but the area also includes smaller hamlets further up in the mountains. If we can’t get there by car, we will take food supplies up there using motorbikes or donkeys.”
The Moroccan prime minister, Aziz Akhannouch, whose family includes survivors of a deadly earthquake in Agadir in 1960, said the country could be “proud of the spontaneous solidarity of Moroccans”.
Omar Saadoune, a civil society activist, speaking from Casablanca, described his communications with residents of remote mountain villages in Al Haouz.
“The situation is catastrophic, many houses completely crumbled. As these were homes largely made of mud bricks, when they collapsed they also buried entombed people, which also makes the possibility of finding people alive more difficult. There are many dead, but it is very difficult to evaluate the number of them.”
Residents of the isolated villages high in the peaks of the Atlas mountains were dependent on aid deliveries for water and basic food, he said, a situation made more complicated by the loss of electricity resources and ongoing issues with telephone networks. “Anyone that had any remaining phone battery left used it to demand help,” Saadoune said.
Some mountain villages such as Talat N’Yaaqoub, 60 miles south of Marrakech, which lies close to a main road from the ancient city, had begun to slowly clear access but villages such as Aghbar far farther south remained completely inaccessible, he said.
Mehrdad Sasani, a professor of civil and environmental engineering at Northeastern University in the US, said the cheaper mud-brick houses that predominated throughout the villages increased the risk of fatalities during an earthquake.
Residents and experts of the affected region have long pointed to neglect by the state, particularly a lack of basic infrastructure across Al Haouz. “These types of structure are very brittle, meaning they don’t have the capacity for flexibility and movement required during an earthquake, meaning they would crumble,” Sasani said.
In addition, he said, the clay-type material used to build homes increased the suffocation risk for inhabitants trapped under the debris, as when the homes collapsed it did not allow for any air pockets that could allow survivors to continue to breathe.
“These homes have heavy walls that carry the weight of the roofs. When these come down, it leads to a higher likelihood of casualties,” he said.
Morocco earthquake: hope fades of finding survivors in rubble
Complicated rescue effort continues as questions remain about king and government’s response
Hope of finding earthquake survivors trapped under their homes in some of the remotest parts of the Atlas mountains in Morocco was fading rapidly as rescue efforts continued into their fourth day.
Search and rescue teams were still attempting to reach the smallest hamlets and villages in the mountainous region of Al Haouz, close to the epicentre of the 6.8-magnitude quake that struck on Friday night.
Morocco’s armed forces have set up field hospitals in the earthquake zone and flown helicopters over the peaks in an attempt to distribute aid and ferry the wounded.
“It’s clear that as time passes, the chance of finding survivors under the rubble is diminishing,” said Moulay Hafid Alaoui, the head of the Moroccan Red Cross for Marrakech-Safi. He cited access problems along mountain roads that had sustained damage.
As the complicated rescue efforts continued and the number of dead neared 3,000, with more than 5,000 wounded, questions remained about the nature of the state’s response. Morocco’s King Mohammed VI returned from France on Saturday to chair a disaster management meeting with the cabinet that afternoon but he has not spoken directly to the public.
The king arrived in Marrakech, the major city closest to the earthquake zone, on Tuesday evening and visited earthquake victims at their hospital bedside according to state media. But there has been little suggestion of a royal visit to the impoverished Al Haouz region worst affected by the disaster.
Hassan Aourid, one of Morocco’s most prominent public intellectuals and a former palace spokesperson, spoke to the Guardian from the town of Amizmiz, at the foot of the Atlas, while volunteering with rescue efforts.
“At first, there was a sentiment among the population that they had been left to fend for themselves, given that this a mountainous region with many areas that are extremely difficult to access,” he said. “People felt abandoned, although this was not the case due to the deployment of the armed forces who also brought first responders with them as well as setting up hospitals.
“Without question, there is now a feeling of reassurance, people are much more reassured after the king’s emergency meeting,” he added, referring to the disaster response meeting that took place several days earlier.
Moroccan public television aired footage of a meeting on Sunday in the administrative centre of Al Haouz region between the interior minister, the army, health ministers and local authorities. Cabinet ministers, including the prime minister, Aziz Akhannouch, who hails from a southern province also affected by the earthquake, are yet to visit members of the public in Al Haouz.
Observers such as Samia Errazzouki, an expert in the history and governance of the Moroccan state at Stanford University in California, said government ministers were attempting to respond to the crisis while ensuring their work did not overshadow any efforts by the palace.
The king has for years been accused of governing the country from France, where he reportedly owns a 10-bedroom mansion near the Eiffel Tower and a chateau north-east of Paris, despite strained diplomatic relations between the two countries.
“The state is fundamentally a reflection of how ineffective Moroccan governance has been, due to the fact that it relies entirely on an authoritarian structure of a figure who is very absent,” Errazzouki said.
Speaking to CNN, Khalid Zerouali, an official from Morocco’s interior ministry, rebuffed questions about whether the king would visit the earthquake zone or even make any further public statements, pointing instead to the emergency session last weekend.
“It’s a time of actions not words and we are working under the instructions and guidance of his majesty … he’s been working closely and he’s been following minute by minute what’s happening in the field,” he said.
Wedding party saves residents of Moroccan village from quake
Outdoor event hosted by bride’s family meant no one was trapped when buildings collapsed
A wedding celebration saved all the people of a Moroccan village during Friday’s deadly earthquake, which destroyed their stone and mud-brick houses while they were enjoying traditional music in an outdoor courtyard.
The marriage of Habiba Ajdir, 22, and Mohammed Boudad, 30, an apple farmer, was due to take place at his village of Kettou on Saturday, but by custom the bride’s family held a party the night before the wedding.
A video filmed by a guest showed the moment the 6.8-magnitude earthquake struck, with images of musicians in traditional clothes playing on flutes and handheld goatskin drums, suddenly giving way to chaos, darkness and screaming.
Standing beside his wife on Tuesday, and still wearing their wedding clothes nearly four days after the quake buried their possessions in rubble, Boudad said the tremor had overwhelmed him with fear for her as he waited in his own village.
“We wanted to celebrate. Then the quake hit. I didn’t know whether to worry about her village or mine,” he said.
As he spoke, Boudad held his wife’s hand. He smiled when asked how they had met, saying only that they were “brought together by fate”. Ajdir was so traumatised by the earthquake she did not want to speak to strangers, he said.
Her impoverished village of Ighil Ntalghoumt was left in ruins, and many of its people are now homeless, but unlike in other parts of the Adassil region, close to the tremor’s epicentre, there were no deaths or serious injuries, residents said.
The earthquake was Morocco’s deadliest since 1960, killing more than 2,900 people, mostly in remote settlements in the High Atlas mountain range south of Marrakech.
On the video, people scream and shout “earthquake”, or call for family members as the overhead electric lighting is replaced by pinpoints of light from mobile phones.
Only one person in Ighil Ntalghoumt, an eight-year-old boy named Ahmed Ait Ali Oubella, was injured in the quake when a rock fell on his head, cutting it open, and he can be seen in the video being carried to safety by his father.
The party was a traditional pre-wedding celebration thrown by the family of the bride before she was to depart the next day for the house of the groom, Boudad, waiting in Kettou.
Despite the disaster, she travelled to Kettou on Saturday with Boudad’s brother and his wife, who had been at the party, leaving behind her marriage gifts and arriving in the afternoon.
The roads were so bad they had to walk the whole way and when they arrived they found widespread damage but no deaths.
As in Ighil Ntalghoumt, a communal event had saved many lives, with villagers commemorating a funeral in a house that stayed upright.
Boudad had bought 150 chickens and 30kg (66 pounds) of fruit to celebrate the wedding that afternoon but much of it has now rotted.
“When she arrived there was nowhere to sleep. We are just looking for a tent,” he said.
The terrible fate the people of Ighil Ntalghoumt escaped was clearly visible a few kilometres down the winding mountain road towards Marrakech, where the village of Tikekhte was almost entirely wiped out. Not a house was left standing and 68 people perished out of the village’s 400 inhabitants.
But while the people of Ighil Ntalghoumt were saved, they were still in dire need of help and some of them could be seen walking down the mountain to ask the authorities for aid.
Ordinary Moroccans bring aid to quake-hit villages amid criticism of official response
Thousands of ordinary citizens are travelling from all over the country to bring aid to survivors of the earthquake
Morocco’s route nationale 10 was once a pretty road through the High Atlas mountains connecting Marrakech with Agadir on the Atlantic coast.
Winding through a series of steep-sided high valleys, it has now become one of the key aid routes to reach the communities closest to the epicentre of last week’s deadly earthquake that has now claimed 2,900 lives.
With the road partly opened since the weekend as far as the devastated community of Talat N’Yaaqoub about 12 miles (20km) from where the earthquake struck, it has also become the route of choice for thousands of ordinary Moroccans driving their own aid to the mountains amid mounting frustration with the government’s efforts.
It is not an easy road nor a safe one. In places the narrow paving has slipped into the valley below. Elsewhere boulders and landslides have fallen on the road, now pushed aside by the earthmovers that have been brought up to open the route.
Dirt trickling down the steepest slopes and signs of fresh rockfall serve as a warning of how fragile this lifeline remains – especially if rain comes.
Since it opened on Sunday night it has been transformed into an endless series of dusty traffic jams, with the traffic managed by soldiers and Berber villagers and members of the Royal Gendarmerie who have been stationed along the road to thread the huge aid trucks up into the mountain.
But mostly it is ordinary Moroccans in hundreds – if not thousands – of cars who have taken to this mountain route to help their fellow countrymen in distress.
The vehicles are loaded high with mattresses and plastic sheeting, bundles of clothes and bedding for the cold mountain nights.
At one spot where the road widened vehicles unloaded aid, including bottled water and shelters, into big piles to be taken further up the mountains.
Ambulances in convoys from Moroccan provinces jostled for space with search and rescue teams and crocodiles of army vehicles carrying generators and earthmovers on low loaders.
Amid criticism that Morocco has turned down offers of more international assistance, another question has arisen: whether too much of the wrong kind of assistance is arriving in areas whose needs have already moved on in the days since the earthquake struck.
Those driving aid on their own initiative had come from all over the country: Marrakech, Casablanca, Rabat and Tangier.
At one of many halts, the Guardian met a group of 16 young men in three vans, all supporters of the Raja Casablanca football team.
“It’s taken us all day driving to get to Talat N’Yaaqoub,” explained Ziko, the driver of one of the vans.
“We have food and clothes and money we’ve collected for the victims of the earthquake. We felt we needed to do it.”
Two other men who work for a tourist travel company said they planned to sleep in their car before making a diversion on the way back to Marrakech to deliver aid to villages on the other side of the mountains.
In Talat N’Yaaqoub itself, once home to 3,000 people, a steady stream of helicopters cut across the mountain ridges towards Irghil, the epicentre of the disaster, still inaccessible by road.
A chinook landed in the town, enveloping the streets in dust. It was big enough to carry a substantial cargo of aid but when its rotors halted a few senior army officers emerged accompanied by a cameraman.
While concrete buildings have remained standing in other places, in Talat N’Yakub the concrete floors of offices and shops have concertinaed and collapsed.
The extensive central market has been destroyed while the tower of a mosque teeters over ruins.
On the main street people sat on benches, some of them still in a state of profound shock. The Guardian spoke briefly to a woman who lost her husband in the quake, who said she could not speak about what happened, her face ashen.
A search-dog team worked in the ruins of a building where villagers suggested as many as 200 might have died. Recently arrived search-and-rescue teams milled around waiting to be deployed.
About 100 tents have been put up in the town, each able to hold a family of 10. In the smaller villages, tents are visible in the olive groves beside the road. But shelter remains in short supply.
Hayat ait Louchine, 24, had gone to the visit the hamam when the earthquake struck. At home her six-year-old niece was killed.
“We don’t have a tent yet, and we really need one as it is so cold up here in the mountains,” she said as she pointed at a haze of clouds. “We’re worried what will happen if it rains but we don’t know who to ask to get a tent.”
She said that while the first army helicopters reached them over the weekend, the first aid only began arriving in earnest by road on Monday as the road was opened.
Nordeen ait Boulecine, who lost his mother and daughter, told a similar story. “The first helicopters came on Saturday. And brought food and some clothes and a search team. But we don’t have running water or electricity. This village has been here for a century,” he added. “For now, I can’t tell you how it will be rebuilt.”
Morocco earthquake: Macron tries to soothe tensions after frosty response to offer of aid
French president addresses Moroccans directly amid political rift between Rabat and Paris
The French president, Emmanuel Macron, has attempted to soothe tensions with Morocco over the supply of humanitarian aid, after a deadly earthquake centred high in the Atlas mountains.
Search and rescue teams backed by the Moroccan military continued a frantic search to locate and airlift the wounded from remote mountainous villages in the Atlas mountains where the 6.8 magnitude quake struck last Friday. But as rescue efforts continued for a fifth day, the chances of finding survivors were fading.
Moroccan authorities said earlier this week they had “responded favourably” to offers of help from search and rescue teams from Britain, Spain, Qatar and the United Arab Emirates, but declined to accept aid from other countries including France.
In a video addressing the Moroccan public posted to social media, Macron said it was a sovereign matter for Morocco whether it accepted French aid or not. Previously, at the G20 in Delhi, he had said France had done “everything we could do” and that aid would be deployed the second it was requested.
Morocco has bristled at any suggestion that the state lacks capacity to respond to the disaster.
“There have been plenty of unwarranted controversies in these past few days,” Macron said in the video, posted while non-governmental French organisations departed for the earthquake zone south of Marrakech and amid a continued silence from Rabat. “There is the possibility of supplying humanitarian aid directly. It is clearly up to his majesty the king and the Moroccan government, in a manner entirely befitting their sovereignty, to organise international aid,” he said.
“I wish that all these controversies which divide and complicate matters during this already tragic moment can subside out of respect for all involved.”
Tensions between the two nations were heightened even before the earthquake struck. Morocco has not dispatched an ambassador to France for months and Macron has aborted several planned state visits to Rabat. French colonial rule over Morocco, lasting from 1912 to 1956, has long cast a shadow over relations between the two countries.
Morocco’s king, Mohammed VI, is however believed to spend much of his time at his multiple private residences in France, governing from a chateau near Paris or a mansion close to the Eiffel Tower.
A source close to Morocco’s royal palace said a reaction to Macron’s video message from either the palace or the foreign ministry was unlikely.
“In Morocco, we don’t govern via Twitter,” they said. “This video makes a mockery of governance. He has no right to address the Moroccan people directly … He is trying to prevent further controversies, but these are controversies that he has both created and fuelled himself, using social media.”
Controversies around aid were not restricted solely to Moroccan relations with France. Earlier this week, Algeria declared that it would open its airspace to allow humanitarian assistance to reach Morocco, a profound shift after Algiers cut diplomatic ties with its neighbour two years ago over what it termed Morocco’s “hostile actions”.
Days later, Algerian state television displayed images of first responders lined up on the tarmac of a military airport near the town of Boufarik, ready to board three nearby planes carrying aid to Morocco.
Morocco’s justice minister, Abdellatif Ouahbi, told Saudi Arabian satellite channel Al Arabiya that Rabat would accept Algerian aid, although Moroccan media later claimed his comments were misinterpreted and denied any suggestion that Rabat would accept the aid.
The Algerian foreign ministry then released a statement via the state press agency, adding that “the Algerian government has taken note of the official response of the Kingdom of Morocco, which said that it was not in need of the humanitarian aid proposed by Algeria”.
After Morocco’s devastating earthquake, the tourism industry rallies round
Travel and tour operators are getting involved in the country’s relief effort, knowing how vital tourism is to its economy
“My family is safe,” our tour guide Sara Chakir said as we huddled in the streets outside Fez’s medina, waiting for aftershocks until the early hours. Morocco’s 6.8 magnitude earthquake had struck last Friday, 350 miles away in the Al Haouz region of the High Atlas mountains at just after 11pm. It was enough to send our riad swaying, but there was no apparent damage to people or place. It was only in the morning that the scale of destruction elsewhere was clear. Another tour guide, Hossain ait Mhand, said: “My family is fine, but others in their town are not so lucky – homes have been flattened.”
I was on my way to a conference in Marrakech, about 40 miles north of where the earthquake was centred, but detoured home. Those already in the city saw blood bank queues snaking around the streets after a government call out. Marrakech’s medina experienced damage, and 50 people were reported to have died there. Tourists trickled out of the city.
Three days later, the death toll was almost 3,000, and with more than 5,000 people injured. Some of Morocco’s most remote communities were the hardest hit, making recovery efforts difficult. Some villages are still waiting for relief; in others, rescuers have little hope – ancient clay buildings have crumbled entirely. The village of Tafeghaghte, for example, has lost 90 of its 400 residents.
Though the Al Haouz region is a popular hiking destination edging into peak season, tourists have been relatively unharmed.
Chris McHugo, co-owner of the community-run hotel Kasbah du Toubkal, said: “Here in Imlil, the damage is less than in other places. It’s partly because tourism has funded building work here, meaning the village is more structurally sound than others. The old part of our kasbah is damaged, but the rooms were unharmed.”
Others have not been as fortunate. In the quiet village of Agnie, a beautiful, locally owned lodge I visited last year, Chez Momo II, has been badly damaged.
Just down the road in Asni, Education For All, a charity providing boarding and support so that girls from the region’s most remote communities can go to school, has been devastated by the earthquake. Its chief executive, Sonia Omar, has said it will have to rebuild at least five of the six boarding houses.
“Our immediate need is confirming our girls’ safety and cooperating with aid agencies to get food, water, blankets, torches and medical supplies where they are most needed,” she said. There are still 55 girls unaccounted for. The charity has started emergency fundraising focused on long-term repair.
Morocco had a record-breaking 2.9 million international visitors in the first quarter of 2023, and the travel industry has been quick to rally support. The Intrepid Foundation, run by the adventure travel company Intrepid Travel – which takes groups to destinations around the country – is fundraising for its two NGO partners on the ground: Education For All for long-term relief and the High Atlas Foundation for immediate relief. The latter usually runs sustainable infrastructure projects, so it is well placed to redeploy services. So far, Intrepid has raised AUS$340,582 (£176,620) after fund matching the first AUS$100,000.
Much Better Adventures is donating 5% of its September revenue to the High Atlas Foundation. Exodus Adventure Travels has launched fundraising for React disaster response, and Global Giving‘s Morocco Earthquake Relief Fund is supporting immediate needs. This week The Conscious Travel Foundation rallied industry support at a fundraiser in London, where they raised £10,000 and discussed how best to respond to these kinds of disasters.
For those travelling to Morocco imminently, the Foreign Office advice is to check with travel companies and tour operators before departing, though the industry’s overall message is one of still encouraging people to travel.
Intrepid has adapted itineraries that involve the Atlas mountains region, and other tour operators are doing the same. The message from tour guides, NGOs, and travel businesses is increasingly clear: continuing to travel responsibly is an important part of support.
“Our message is strong,” said Gail Leonard from the local operator Plan-it Morocco. “Your tourism dollar is critical to the ongoing relief effort here in Morocco.”
Jarrod Kyte, the product and sustainability director at Steppes Travel, who was in the mountains during the earthquake, agrees. Steppes’ partner at Hotel Dar Ahlam in Skoura told me: “Beyond the aid that is being provided, tourist arrivals constitute a message of hope and support that is just as necessary and vital for Morocco.”
Libya and Morocco: two very different responses to catastrophe
The aftermath of an earthquake in Morocco and flooding in Libya has shown up the state of the two nations
Not one but two disasters have struck in recent days – the earthquake in Morocco and devastating flooding in Libya.
At least 2,900 people are known to have died in the 6.8-magnitude earthquake that struck in Morocco’s High Atlas mountains a week ago, and the authorities say the death toll will rise.
Three days later, on 11 September, intense flooding in Libya led to the collapse of two dams that unleashed a torrent of mud and water into Derna, destroying large parts of the eastern city.
On Friday morning, the Libyan Red Crescent said the number of people who had died in the city had risen to 11,000 and was expected to rise further as rescue teams arrived and helped to retrieve more bodies from the mud. Officials said 30,000 people were missing.
The full scale of the disaster may be far greater, as few international aid agencies or news reporters have been able to reach the flood-hit area. This area is controlled not by the government in Tripoli but by a rival warlord.
Morocco and Libya may be geographically relatively close to each other – just a 2,000km hop across Algeria – but they could not be two more different countries. This has had a huge impact on their ability to respond to the disasters.
Peter Beaumont, a senior Guardian international reporter, has spent this week in the Atlas mountains and is a veteran of several reporting trips to Libya. He says: “Libya is a failed – or semi-failed – state that has been caught up in a protracted civil war since 2011, which has obviously had a massive impact on the country’s infrastructure and social cohesion.
“Morocco, on the other hand, is a functioning modern state. The place works – Marrakech, Tangier, Rabat are all modern cities. Ordinary people have been mobilised on a mass scale, and there is a very strong sense of nationhood.”
The difference between Libya and Morocco
Beaumont arrived in Morocco on Sunday and was able to drive directly to above the epicentre near Adassil. “Within an hour, I was at an earthquake-hit village and speaking to people affected and those providing help.”
He says it would be a totally different story if the news desk had sent him to report on the Libyan flooding. “One of the challenges of covering disasters that coincide with conflict are fractured lines of control: it’s not a question of just flying to Tripoli and getting a car. I have worked in Libya and it is an incredibly difficult place to work.”
Firstly, you need a visa. But there’s no telling if one would be granted, or how long it would take to come through. If a visa was granted, it would be for the western areas controlled by the government in Tripoli. But the flooding is in Derna, in the eastern region controlled by Gen Khalifa Haftar of the Libyan National Army, who has been supported by Egypt and helped by Russian mercenaries from the notorious Wagner group.
“Reporting from Libya was one of the most dangerous jobs I’ve ever done,” says Beaumont, who was last in Libya to cover the toppling of its previous dictator, Col Muammar Gaddafi, in 2011.
These safety concerns, and crumbling infrastructure since the death of Gaddafi, have made it very hard for international aid agencies or reporters to get a real sense of the devastation in Derna.
“As nasty, autocratic states go, Libya under Gaddafi functioned and it had a huge amount of money from oil. It was a place that worked – in a horrible way with no rights or freedoms, but it had decent infrastructure. Not so much now.”
The World Meteorological Organization said the huge death toll could have been avoided if Libya, a failed state for more than a decade, had a functioning weather agency. “They could have issued warnings,” said Petteri Taalas, its secretary general. “The emergency management authorities would have been able to carry out evacuation of the people. And we could have avoided most of the human casualties.”
Libya’s attorney general has been asked by senior politicians to launch an urgent inquiry “to hold accountable everyone who made a mistake or neglected by abstaining or taking actions that resulted in the collapse of the city’s dams”.
Beaumont says: “We still don’t really know the scale of the disaster. Is it 20,000 dead, as the mayor of Derna says? It could be more.”
International aid only started to reach Derna on Wednesday afternoon, two days after the catastrophe. It may now be too late to save lives. The mayor, Abdulmenam al-Ghaithi, said: “We actually need teams specialised in recovering bodies.”
A search team director, Lutfi al-Misrati, told Al Jazeera: “I fear that the city will be infected with an epidemic due to the large number of bodies under the rubble and in the water. We need bags for the bodies.”
Another official said the number of dead people could increase significantly as the “sea is constantly dumping dozens of bodies”.
The role of Morocco’s king
While it is much easier to get international aid to Morocco, the government has been criticised for not accepting more assistance. So far only search and rescue teams from the UK, Qatar, Spain and the United Arab Emirates have been allowed in. Offers of help from the US, Tunisia, Turkey, Taiwan and, significantly, the former colonial power France have not been accepted.
The king of Morocco, Mohammed VI, has refused support from Paris, which ruled Morocco as a colony between 1912 and 1956, after years of fraught relations. It led the French president, Emmanuel Macron, to post a video saying: “There is the possibility of supplying humanitarian aid directly. It is clearly up to his majesty the king and the Moroccan government, in a manner entirely befitting their sovereignty, to organise international aid.”
Despite the king’s apparent dislike of the French government, he spends much of the year in a 10-bedroom, €80m (£68.7m) mansion near the Eiffel Tower, complete with a swimming pool, spa and hair salon. He also owns Chateau de Betz, an 18th-century castle about 30 miles north-east of Paris.
How Morocco’s communities responded
Beaumont says the furore over Morocco rejecting aid may have been overblown, and it is unclear if Rabat needs much more international support because of the specific nature of this tragedy. Most of the houses were built of mud bricks rather than concrete, he says, so people “either died or survived”.
Moroccans have reopened most of Route Nationale 10, the main road through the High Atlas mountains, to Talat N’Yaaqoub, about 12 miles (20km) from where the earthquake struck. “It’s a pretty incredible achievement to have reopened a road where large sections had been blocked by rockfall just days earlier,” he says.
As Beaumont was coming back down route 10, thousands of ordinary Moroccans were driving aid up the mountain. Among them he met a group of 16 young men in three vans, all supporters of the Raja Casablanca football team.
“It’s taken us all day driving to get to Talat N’Yaaqoub,” Ziko, the driver of one of the vans, told him. “We have food and clothes and money we’ve collected for the victims of the earthquake. We felt we needed to do it.”
In a reversal of roles, Beaumont was stopped by a local journalist who asked to interview him. “What she really wanted to ask was: ‘Aren’t you impressed with what we’ve been able to do?’” he says.
“And I was. It was genuinely impressive to see ordinary Moroccans do this. It’s how humanity should be – not politics but the community helping the community. In a couple of years’ time, I think, when people ask me what I remember about the Morocco earthquake, it is not just going to be the sadness and devastation, it will be how ordinary people responded. That is hugely positive, and given that I cover a lot of grim stories, it says a lot.”
‘We need to start again’: Morocco’s earthquake puts girls’ education at risk
Charity that runs boarding houses to help girls in remote Atlas mountains get to school scrambles to find out what facilities remain
When a powerful earthquake struck deep below Morocco’s Atlas mountains last Friday night, the school year had only just begun. Staff from a girls’ education charity who had stayed late at work suddenly found themselves jolted by the force of a 6.8 magnitude quake as the walls of their offices crumbled around them to expose the cold mountain air.
“Many of the girls who we know are at least alive have lost mothers, brothers, fathers, family members and it looks like many of their houses have also been completely destroyed,” said Sonia Omar, the head of Education for All Morocco, her voice cracking. The charity supports a network of six boarding houses for girls across the Atlas, all situated in villages around the epicentre of the quake.
In an instant the force of the quake wrenched apart the walls of the boarding houses, needed in a mountainous region beset by poor infrastructure where schools may otherwise simply be too difficult to access – and 17 years of work to ensure girls in the Atlas can receive an education.
At one boarding house for 52 students in the remote village of Talat N’Yaaqoub, a supervisor filmed the ruins of her bedroom. “Look at all this debris that fell on me during the earthquake,” she said, as piles of exposed bricks lay on her pale lilac bed frame, amid mounds of broken glass and fragments of the building’s exterior.
In the oldest house, which sits in the village of Asni, the quake had torn holes in the walls of the library, destroyed computer equipment and made the building uninhabitable. “This is where they spend their entire week,” said Latifa Aliza, a student coordinator for one of the boarding houses.
“We need to start from the beginning again with the building, because the building is very important,” she added, standing aghast in the ruins of a destroyed dormitory. The organisation says that five out of the six boarding houses will probably need to be torn down and completely rebuilt, with some currently unsafe to even enter.
“The situation is difficult right now; there’s so much damage,” Aliza said. “We still haven’t located all of our students, especially those in the area around Talat N’Yaaqoub, which is still difficult to access. Our organisation is doing everything it can to reach them.” Omar said the organisation is still searching for roughly a third of their student body, which numbers about 250 girls.
Moroccan authorities estimate that almost 3,000 people were killed, and more than 5,500 wounded, in the earthquake. It was centred deep under the Atlas mountains about 43 miles south of Marrakech, but shook buildings and sent people running into the streets in fear as far away as the cities of Casablanca and Rabat in northern Morocco.
A strip of villages dotted across the Atlas mountains in the Al Haouz region around the epicentre were by far the worst hit, because of their location and the intense difficulties in conducting rescues.
Much of Al Haouz has long been deprived of even basic infrastructure, and many of the remotest villages tucked high into the mountain peaks can be reached only on foot. Steep mountain roads that villagers traversed on donkeys or motorbikes are now blocked or dangerously cracked, amid fears of rockslides as aftershocks shake the peaks a week after the earthquake struck.
Helicopters continue to ferry the wounded out of the Atlas, with little hope of finding remaining survivors and fears that many villagers in the remotest villagers suffocated under the ruins of their mud-brick homes, which left no space to breathe as they collapsed.
Morocco’s King Mohammed VI has pledged to rebuild about 50,000 homes damaged by the earthquake.
Education for All was set up to ensure girls access to learning in some of the remotest parts of the Atlas. The challenges of reaching school buildings in the region are often tougher for girls.
Education rates for women in Morocco have slowly risen over the past two decades but as of 2018 64% of girls were in secondary school, according to the World Bank, and fewer than half of the women in Morocco recorded in the most recent figures from 2021 were receiving a tertiary education.
Omar believes ensuring that girls can get into the classroom from a young age is often enough to completely change their future. But with the boarding houses now in ruins, she and her organisation are scrambling to figure out what education facilities remain in the Atlas, and how to keep girls learning even if it means studying online from their tents.
“We’re trying to find out which schools have been damaged. Many teachers in the area lost family members and their homes. They’re sleeping outside in makeshift tents. As the villages are so remote, this is the very reason why we support these communities, because it means the aid that’s trickling in isn’t reaching there at all,” she said.
“Some areas have zero telephone contact, the roads are blocked and many villages aren’t even near a road. You have to park a car an hour away and walk; there’s no infrastructure.”
Amid the devastation, Omar found some small signs of hope. Many of their former graduates who went on to become, in her words, “pillars of their communities”, have now begun to coordinate aid efforts.
Asma Ait Taleb, a former student who went on to graduate from university in Marrakech, was back home in the village of Ouirgane, when the earthquake struck.
“Once I found six former graduates here in Ouirgane, we began trying to trace some of the other girls,” she said. “As soon as the Internet returned, I began sending out messages anywhere I could, publishing on Instagram, asking girls to contact us and for others to provide information.”
The group compiled a list of missing students and began their search, all while travelling throughout some of the remotest villages in the Atlas to distribute vital aid.
“This earthquake has also shown what’s good about our region,” she said. “I hope somehow things will be better than they were before. We have to remain hopeful.”
